The Project Gutenberg eBook of The finding of Jasper Holt
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The finding of Jasper Holt

Author: Grace Livingston Hill


        
Release date: May 25, 2026 [eBook #78752]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1915

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78752

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FINDING OF JASPER HOLT ***






THE FINDING

OF

_JASPER HOLT_


By

Grace Livingston Hill



_GROSSET & DUNLAP * PUBLISHERS_

_NEW YORK_




  COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY MCBRIDE, NAST & CO.
  COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY


  PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.




THE FINDING OF JASPER HOLT



CHAPTER I

Slowly the train rumbled out of the station, gathering speed with
every moment, and leaving behind the friendly faces on the platform.

The girl who had just entered the car looked about her in dismay at
the rough looking crowd by whom she was surrounded.  It was the last
long stretch of her journey now, out on the plains and across the
desert, and the porter of the sleeper had refused to let her enter
the Pullman coach without a Pullman ticket.  Of course it would be
all right when the conductor came, but--suppose her brother-in-law
had forgotten to telegraph for the reservation and she should have to
spend the night in this car?

She slipped into the only vacant seat and sat anxiously awaiting the
coming of the conductor, who was not anywhere in sight.

For the most part the people about her were rough, stolid looking
men, with hard brown faces.  Here and there a woman was huddled
wearily into a corner of the seat trying to sleep.  They were
commonplace folk, nearly all of them, and their very ordinariness
brought her some measure of assurance, yet she shuddered at the
thought of spending her night huddled into a seat, like the other
women, with all those men about, free to gaze on her as she slept.

She glanced across the aisle where the seat was turned over and two
men faced each other, an old man and a young one.  The old man sat
just across from her, his coarse stubbly face turned boldly toward
her.  He had crafty little eyes that intruded with their merest
glance, windows out of which Coarseness, Hate, Cruelty and Fear alike
might look; a sensual loose-hung mouth, and a whole repulsive
atmosphere of cunning that made his face seem utterly evil.
Insensibly she shrank farther away and looked hurriedly about to see
if perchance there might not after all be another vacant seat where
she could be entirely out of his range.  Then her eyes suddenly met
the eyes of his companion who faced her, the young man in the
turned-over seat, and she wondered how she could have failed to
notice him at once.  There was something about his face--perhaps it
was the splendid gray eyes that were looking at her so keenly and
respectfully, or was it the firm chin and almost stern set of the
beautiful lines of lip and brow--that gave her confidence in him at
once.  For there was a strength and beauty in his face such as one
seldom sees blended in a man, which marked him at once as being
different from others.  There was nothing weak nor womanish about
him, in spite of the perfect modelling of his features and the clear
coloring of his skin.  The fine golden-brown hair that rippled back
from his forehead like a halo gave the impression of curling out of
perverseness rather than from the owner's wish.

He was tall and lean and wiry, yet giving the idea of great strength
and fine training.  If it had not been for an abnormal gravity and
the sternness about his mouth she would have judged him to be a mere
boy, yet there was an air of maturity about him that puzzled her.
But his gray eyes met hers kindly, understandingly, as if he knew
exactly what she was thinking--all her anxiety--and would let her
know that she was safe, that he would see that she was safe!  It was
with an almost startled feeling that she met his eyes a second time
as if to be sure she had not been mistaken, and then settled back
into her seat, somehow comforted, assured; as if he had spoken to her
and told her not to fear.  It was really as if something had looked
out of their two souls and acknowledged a sort of mute introduction.
And yet he had not been obtrusive, and almost immediately his eyes
had been withdrawn from her face as if he would not intrude.  He was
looking now at the dreadful old man, rebuking him for his interest in
her it would seem, rebuking most effectually yet without a word, for
the old man wriggled around uneasily in his seat and turned his eyes
away to look out of the window, the hate in his face getting the
uppermost as he cast a furtive, fearsome glance at the younger man
and then turned back to the window.

They were a curious pair; the younger man had the air of being the
keeper of the older one.  The girl wondered how they came to be
travelling together, they seemed so absolutely alien to each other.
It was obvious that the young man had some power over the other, and
this fact gave the girl comfort.

To these two men the entrance of the lovely girl into the monotony of
the journey was a refreshment.  Even the old man, Scathlin, whose low
type of life received only fleshly impressions, and who had grown up
from his tainted babyhood without honor for any woman, felt the
fineness of her nature, the rareness of her modest beauty as she came
near.

To Jasper Holt she was the sudden startling revelation of some pure
dream of his childhood, the reality of which he had come to doubt.
His knowledge of the world told him that probably she was frail and
human and selfish like all the rest if one came to know her, but for
the sake of what she seemed to be he was glad of the vision, and
would protect her at all costs because she was a woman and ought to
have been perfect.  That was his attitude toward the world of women
at that time.

Nevertheless as he looked again at the pure profile turned now toward
her window, and studied the sweet outline of the firm little chin,
pleasant lips, the gentle contour of cheek and lash and brow, the
luminous eyes that were glowing for the moment at the stain of sunset
beginning to trickle through the gloomy gray of the sky, he could not
but feel that here was something different.  It was something for
which he had been hoping all his life--searching for, but never
finding.  Something it was good just to know existed; something whose
existence would make even a stranger better and braver and purer.

She was slight, small, exquisitely fashioned; dressed in some simple,
clinging, dark blue material of form so suitable as to make one fail
to notice just what it was.  Sheer white rolled-back collar and cuffs
set out the white throat and the small gloved hands; the close, dark
blue hat with its graceful tilt and simple garnishing seemed just the
loveliest setting for the beautiful face framed in its soft dark
hair.  Her face was wonderfully pure, free from self-consciousness
and pride; yet she looked as if she knew her own mind and could stand
like a rock for a principle.  There was also a determined little
uplift to her chin that showed a spirit of her own, and a fleeting
dimple that promised a merry appreciation of humor if one knew her
well enough; but the whole dainty person was good to look upon and
Holt kept the vision within his consciousness while he covered
Scathlin with his gaze.

He loathed his task of watching Scathlin, and somehow the sight of
the pure-faced girl had made it even more distasteful.  For almost
two weeks now he had been at it, day and night.  He had not let
Scathlin out of his sight for one moment since he had found him in
Pittsburgh two days after the theft of his wallet containing valuable
papers, land grants, water rights and other documents relating to his
silver mines and other property.

Holt had suspected the old man at once when the wallet was missing,
partly because Scathlin had been seen twice in conversation with the
man Harrington who was Holt's sworn enemy and who was doing all he
could to ruin his prospects and dispute his rights to the water power
which made the working of his mines possible; and partly because
Scathlin had been dismissed summarily from Holt's employ but a few
days previous to the disappearance of the property.

He had trailed Scathlin to Pittsburgh where he found him mounted on a
high stool in the station restaurant eating a comfortable breakfast.
The old rascal turned white under his tan and stubble, and dropped
his knife and fork loudly on the marble of the counter at the
appearance of his former employer; but the cunning in his face had
come at once to the front, and he welcomed Holt as if it were the
pleasantest thing in the world to have him appear just at that lonely
moment and eat breakfast with him.

It was Holt's way not to settle the matter right then and there by
turning the old man over to the police on suspicion, but to attach
himself to Scathlin and find out exactly where those papers were, and
who were the man's employers in the theft.  He was wary enough to
know that Scathlin might have already got rid of the wallet, and he
wished if possible to find out what he had done with the papers and
get Scathlin into his power until he could make him produce them or
tell their whereabouts.

Harrington was superintendent of large mine interests in Hawk Valley,
located near Holt's veins of silver, and owned by an Eastern
syndicate.  Holt knew that capital and cunning might do a great deal
to cripple his interests if they once got him in their power.
Therefore he had shadowed Scathlin day and night all these days.  On
pretence of wanting company for a pleasure trip he had gone wherever
Scathlin professed to be going, giving him no opportunity to even
telegraph to any of the other conspirators for money or instructions;
eating with him, sleeping with him,--at least pretending to
sleep--sticking to him every minute and watching him every waking
second.

It had not been a pleasant task.  Scathlin was a foul-mouthed,
foul-souled companion for any man to tie to, and his personal habits
were anything but attractive.  Time and again Holt had almost turned
from his task with disgust, resolved to let his rights and all go
rather than be tied to the creature another hour.  Yet he had stuck
to him; and now, after these many days of cunning and craftiness, of
trickeries too numerous to mention, of attempted escape on Scathlin's
part; after taking side trips to funerals of Scathlin's relatives who
never had existed, except in imagination; visits to business men who
were supposed to be hounding Scathlin to his death and yet who were
never found,--after all this they were on their way back to Hawk
Valley!  Scathlin had come to the end of his money and his wits, and
had been compelled to accept the escort and financial aid of Holt
back to the place from which he had started, because he did not dare
to do anything else.  This he did both on his own account and for the
sake of his employers, who would not hesitate to leave him in the
lurch to save themselves, and who had warned him above all things not
to let Holt suspect his mission with those papers to the Eastern
syndicate.  Besides, there was always the hope that he might yet
escape and make his way back in time to present those papers to the
man whom Harrington had said would pay him a big reward for bringing
them.  Harrington and his men could not have done it without
suspicion, but the plan was that Scathlin should profess to have
found something valuable to the syndicate and be willing to sell it
at a good price.

It was no wonder that Scathlin's eyes had a hunted look, and his bad
old face under its stubbly growth was almost pitifully desperate as
he looked at the fresh face of the sweet young girl, and for the
moment forgot his misery, gloating over her beauty, while Holt seemed
to be engaged with the sunset view.  But Holt caught the gleam in his
victim's eye and his heart burned hotly within him.  He could have
crushed the creature then and there for the insolence of his gaze.
He could have crushed him like vermin and felt no sin.  All the man
in him roused to resent the evil look.

"Scathlin!"  His tone was cutting with command and the old man turned
cringing and met the steely glance of his captor, then impatient and
trembling with anger began to look again out of the window; again the
crimson wrath surged up his leathery neck and suffused his coarse
features.

The girl, half aware of what had been going on, turned and took it
all in, a frightened color flickering up into her cheeks.  Her eyes,
growing large with vague horror, met Holt's steely gaze, saw it
change and soften reassuringly, as if he were holding at bay a
loathsome blood-hound and wished her to understand she need not fear.
The girl, with one fleeting look of gratitude toward the young man,
turned back again to her window as if nothing had happened.  In fact
no onlooker would have suspected that anything at all had happened,
and yet really a little drama had been enacted and all the actors
understood it as thoroughly as if it had been spoken.  But one word
only had been audible, and the girl wasn't sure she had heard that
aright.

The dusk dropped down and the train sped on over the plains.

And now the sunset stains grew deeper and blended into gold and
crimson and lifted the gray into clear opal spaces of luminous
beauty, spreading the panoply of color far along the horizon of the
plain.  It was a thing to make one look in awe, to hush evil thoughts
and bring a holiness to hearts.  Something of its calm and strength
crept into the girl's expression as she watched it, and once she half
turned to see if Holt was watching too.  But Holt was sitting facing
the other way and could see only the fading trails of glory in the
sky as it sped away from his gaze, though he had caught the
reflection of wonder from her face, and averted his own eyes as if
from too holy a sight.  Those who knew Holt, or thought they knew
him, would have laughed loud and long at such an idea of him, but it
was true.  The girl felt it as she turned safely back to her sunset.

Scathlin was not enjoying the view.  He was looking furtively on
every side to see if there could be by any chance a good place where
he might risk throwing out that cursed wallet and hope ever to find
it again.  If only there would be a station--or he could risk
dropping it out of the window near some water tank or something.  But
the plain slid by, a level monotony, broken only by the rose and
emerald and gold of the setting sun.  Scathlin grew more and more
desperate.  It was growing dark, and he dared not throw the wallet
where he could not find it again, or where someone else might find
it--and yet!  They were nearing Hawk Valley.  The morning would bring
them within the ranging of Holt's men--that band of trained and
devoted outlaws who were as relentless in their justice as they were
careless of their lives.  No mercy was to be expected from their
hands if once he fell among them.  He shivered as a tall shaft of a
bare tree, dead and stark, stood in the distance against the clear
gold of the sunset line.  It was on such a tree he had seen a cattle
thief hang, ghastly against the sky, as he rode by once just at
nightfall.  It might easily be his fate before another sunset.  If he
could not get away in the night all chance of escape before they
reached Hawk Valley was gone, for well he knew Jasper Holt's men were
set at intervals along the way, sentinels ready to head him off.  And
what treatment could he expect from either Jasper Holt or his men
with that incriminating wallet in his pocket?  He had been a fool to
take up with Harrington's offer.  Money or no money, it wasn't worth
the risk.  He was getting to be an old man and not so ready to face
death as when his blood was hot and his hand steady.  He had not even
any weapons of defence, thanks to his grim captor who had disarmed
him while he slept, the first night of their journey together.  There
had never been any open recognition of the fact between them, save
that one glance as Scathlin put his hand to the pocket where it had
been and was not.  He had charged with his eyes in one look of
helpless fury, and Holt's clear gray eyes had met his unflinchingly
in acknowledgment.  That had been all, but Scathlin knew then that
there was nothing for him but to evade Holt and get away if possible.
He would stand no chance in an open conflict, and his captor was
untiringly vigilant.  He glanced again at the stern face opposite
him, wondering what would be the fate to which he was surely, swiftly
hastening.  States prison?  Or would they take the law into their own
hands?  He knew what that might mean only too well, and again the
desperate look passed over his face with Hate and Murder looking
dimly from his eyes.  How he would like to spring at that slim brown
throat opposite him and throttle the life from the young fellow.
Only a kid,--a mere kid,--and yet he had withstood many, and had
power to crush Scathlin in spite of all his boasted cunning.  The
look of a serpent crept into the little gleaming eyes of the old man
as he noticed the quick glance his companion cast at the girl across
the aisle; and his own eyes followed filled with hate.  Yes, he would
like to drive his fat, hairy fingers into the white throat of the
girl before the eyes of her gallant defender if only he had Holt
helpless!  But instead, here was he, helpless himself!  And he must
find a way to escape before morning, or else get rid of that wallet
in some safe way.  Surely, surely Holt would be off his guard
sometimes for a little space.  He had scarcely slept a wink for four
days; how could he endure it much longer?

But Scathlin's cogitations were cut short by the entrance of the
conductor at last and he turned to watch the girl as she spoke to him.

"I was to have had a section reserved for me," she was saying to the
conductor.  "My brother-in-law, Mr. James Harrington of Hawk Valley,
arranged for it, and telegraphed me that it was all right.  See, I
have the telegram.  But the porter said I must come in here until I
saw you because I had no ticket for the Pullman."

She held out the yellow envelope and the conductor looked at it.

"Your brother's name is Harrington?  You are going to Hawk Valley?"

He looked at her sharply.  "Well, just wait a few minutes till I go
through the next car and then I'll see to it.  It ought to be all
right."

He bustled on his way attending to his passengers and the girl sat
back again to wait.

At the name "Harrington" Scathlin had turned with a start and looked
toward the girl; but even in the act he caught the narrow gleam of
Holt's half-closed eyes, and, remembering, turned back again to his
window while his thoughts went pounding into new channels.  He had
made a mistake, of course, to let Holt see that he had heard, so he
kept his eyes toward the window until it grew quite dark.  But he had
a plan at last.  In another minute he got upon his feet, yawning, and
declared his intention of getting a drink of water from the cooler at
the other end of the car.

"Good idea!" said Holt, rising and following his captive down the
aisle lazily.

Scathlin reached the cooler first and took his drink, while Holt
stood waiting for the cup and let Scathlin go back to his seat alone,
apparently not noticing him.  Scathlin settled back in his seat with
one eye on Holt, and one eye on the girl.

Holt stood drinking in a leisurely way, apparently interested in
looking through the glass of the door into the next car though he was
fully aware that Scathlin was fumbling in the inner pocket of his
flannel shirt.  He lingered, hoping that the old man would do
something which would make him more certain of what he already
believed to be true, and saw Scathlin finally, after repeated
fumbling under the shirt, draw forth a small dark object that, in the
one swift glimpse Holt had of it, looked like his own leather wallet
in search of which he had come this long hard journey.  Anxious to
see what Scathlin's next move was to be, he remained quietly standing
and still apparently looking through the car door, though not a move
of Scathlin's was lost upon him.  To his amazement he suddenly saw
Scathlin bend forward and pick up something from the car floor, then
lean toward the girl in the opposite seat and put the object in her
lap, at the same time speaking to her.  Had the man picked up
something the girl had dropped or was he----?  Preposterous!  The
fellow wouldn't dare, with a strange girl.  She was smiling and
looking down at the thing in her lap and seemed to be thanking him.
She had probably dropped her handkerchief or pocketbook and Scathlin
had picked it up.  Holt sauntered leisurely back to his seat and
found Scathlin fumbling with his shoe lace.  He studied him narrowly
and fancied that he detected a look of cunning satisfaction on the
stubbly old face, yet was puzzled to know what caused it.  Had the
scoundrel dared to give those papers to the girl when he stood in
full view?  It seemed incredible,--and yet?  If he had, Holt's hands
were pretty well tied and he had two to watch instead of one.  He
didn't like the idea of shadowing this beautiful young woman.

Just then the conductor returned and spoke to the girl.

"Well, your berth's reserved for you all right, but it was in the
name of Harrington.  It's section seven in the next car.  This your
baggage?  Come this way and I'll show you."

The girl followed the conductor, with a half hesitating glance toward
Scathlin who was engaged with his shoe.  Holt noticed she held her
hand bag clasped tightly as if she were afraid it might be taken from
her.  When she was gone the night settled down unpleasantly about
them and Scathlin, apparently worn out, snored as he had not dared to
do for a week.  But Holt sat up and studied his problem.  He could
not afford to take any chances on sleep that night; moreover his
heart was in a tumult.  This girl was coming to Hawk Valley, to visit
the Harringtons.  She was a sister of Mrs. Harrington, the handsomest
woman, the best dressed woman, the most influential woman in all that
Valley.  Would he ever see the girl?  Sometimes, from afar
perhaps--and a bitter look swept over his face.

Scathlin slept on, with his coarse lower jaw down dropped, and all
his unpleasant features relaxed.  He was no charming picture to look
upon.  Holt noticed that there was no longer that furtive grasp of
one hand upon his breast which had been since their journey together
had begun.  Scathlin's horny hands, with their grasping look of
cunning, were lying idly by his side, and Scathlin himself was
enjoying a well-earned rest, his heavily shod feet sprawled out under
Holt's seat.

The night droned on; the train sped on its way through the darkness,
and still Holt sat wide awake and thinking.

"I can't quite dope things out," he said to himself as he settled
back in a new position.




CHAPTER II

Meanwhile Jean Grayson had followed her bustling conductor into the
sleeper with a sense of deep relief.  She had been frankly frightened
since the rough old tramp-looking creature across the aisle had
landed a worn-looking wallet surreptitiously in her lap and asked if
he hadn't heard her say she was going to Mr. Harrington at Hawk
Valley, and would she be so good as to give that case of important
papers to him and not let anyone else know she had it?

She had accepted the trust because she did not know what else to do;
and after all, it seemed a simple enough request.  The man had
explained that he had to go off in another direction at the next stop
and could not deliver the goods himself and it was most important
that it get to her brother at once.  There did not seem to be any
good reason why she should refuse, and yet it had frightened her, and
she wished with all her heart that she had gone with the conductor to
see about the sleeper and not stayed here to have this dirty old
leather case put into her keeping by that dirty old man.  She did not
know what to do with it.  She hated to put it in her dear little new
handbag, and she restrained her well cut nose from a shrinking sniff
as she hastily put it out of sight.

She had sat looking out of the darkened window with her heart in a
tumult as the tall young man with the fine eyes and the air of
reckless assurance came back to his seat.  What had he to do with the
old fellow?  Could he be his son?  No, never!  But did he know about
the important papers?  Could he have put the old man up to giving
them to her, so that, under some pretence or other, he himself might
speak to her?  She did not dare to look his way lest he should
presume upon the old man's speaking.  This, her first Western trip,
was a fearsome thing to her, although she revelled in the joy of it.

Yet, when she arose to follow the conductor and gave one swift
comprehensive glance toward the opposite seat, she saw a respectful
pair of gray eyes looking interestedly at her, with nothing
presumptuous in them, and she instantly felt that there was no need
to fear that young man.  He might be dressed like a cow-boy, but he
had eyes like a gentleman.

Miss Grayson was tired, for she had come a long journey, stopping a
day on the way with relatives who had taken her sight-seeing and kept
her going every minute, so that she was glad to creep into her berth
as soon as the porter had made it up.

She shrank in dislike from the leather case in her handbag, and after
some hesitation took it out and wrapped it in a leaf from a magazine
she had brought with her.  She could not bear to have the thing in
with all her nice fresh handkerchiefs and dainty little articles.  It
seemed contaminating.  She had a half impulse to throw it away or
lose it; and then her conscience reproached her loudly for so
dishonorable a thought.  The papers might be valuable, of course, and
in that case her brother would have just cause to blame her if she
did not bring them.  At the same time she hated the thought of
carrying around anything that had been in the possession of that
repulsive-looking man.

As she settled herself to sleep and drew around her the folds of the
soft silk Pullman robe that had been her mother's parting surprise,
loving thoughts of those she had left behind her filled her mind.
All the little tender words, looks and acts of loving sacrifice that
she might be well fitted out for this journey, came flocking to be
recognized, until unbidden tears filled her eyes.  This silken robe
was an extravagance, she knew, and would be paid for by many a denial
on the part of father and mother, but it represented their great love
for her.  A thought of what they would have felt about her being
accosted by that rough man and asked to carry that package for him
came to trouble her, yet what other possible thing was there for her
to do but to accept it?  It certainly could not be dynamite or an
infernal machine.  Her mother would have thought of something of that
nature the first thing,--or infection, perhaps smallpox or something
equally horrible.  That was possible, of course.  But still, the man
looked healthy enough.

Her father?  Yes, her father would undoubtedly have approved of her
taking the package.  Her father was one who never thought of himself
when anything in the shape of duty demanded attention, and he had
brought her up with the same feeling.  Anyway, now that she had taken
it and agreed to deliver it, there seemed nothing more to be done but
to keep her word, and it was a simple enough affair, of course, and
after all, quite reasonable.  Why should it bother her so?

Nevertheless, it mingled with her dreaming thoughts as she drifted
off to sleep, and a kind of assurance with regard to it came as she
remembered the steady, clear eyes of the younger man.

Softly in her silken wrapping she lay and slept while the monotonous
hum of the rushing train only lulled her to deeper slumber.

Suddenly, in the midst of the commonplace sounds of the journey there
came a grinding, grating shriek as of strong metal hard pressed and
unable to withstand.  A crash, a jolt, then terrible confusion.  The
very foundations of the earth seemed upshaken, the cars climbing
through the awful air, then pitching, writhing, tossing, and at last
settling uncertainly in strange positions, while the night was filled
with horrid sounds too varying to analyze.  Cries of women and
children!  Groans of men in mortal agony; breaking glass and
splintering timbers; rending of metal in reluctant, discordant clang!
And below, rising menacingly to threaten all, came the lurid glare of
flame, the wild, exultant crackle of fire that knows its opportunity
and power; the desperate hysterical clamor of those who have
discovered it, and the mad, brave shouts of those who would attempt
to conquer it.

Jean Grayson awoke in dazed bewilderment.  For a moment the noise
seemed a part of her dream; her strange, huddled position on the wood
at the foot of her berth, a figment of her imagination.  But almost
at once the cold breath from the broken window brought her to her
senses.  An accident!  It had come then!  The thing which her mother
had feared and tried to provide against.  She was in a railroad
accident all alone and out in the wilds of the West where she was
utterly unacquainted with anyone!  It was characteristic of Jean
that, when she realized her plight, she thought first of how her
mother would take the news, and not of how she would bear the
experience, or whether it meant life and death to herself.  That she
must get out of danger and let her mother know of her safety was her
instant impulse, and from that moment her senses were keenly on the
alert for every detail.

Her mother's horror of railroad accidents made the possibilities of
her present position as plain to her as if she had lived the whole
experience before.  She seemed to comprehend in a flash just what had
happened, and about the position the car was in at the time.  The
lurid glare that was already leaping and flickering outside showed
jagged glass in the window frame, and scattered gleaming fragments
all about her.  She must move carefully not to be cut by them.  Fire!
That was the next thing she took in.  That meant that her only hope
of life was to get out at once.  Cautiously she looked out of the
window to get a better idea of things and her heart stood still with
the horror of it all.  For one little terrible second she forgot her
mother's fears and felt her own gasping, choking terror at what was
before her.  One moment she faced a probable death, felt her
helplessness, and gave a cry of anguish for those who had always
protected her from peril, and who were far away.  Then her own brave
courage rose and steadied her nerves.  She resolved not to die if
there were any possible way out of it; and terror relaxed its hold
upon her at sight of her courage.

With resolute determination she held her horror-stricken eyes to take
in the situation in detail.  She must know everything, see
everything, if she were to save herself, for she comprehended readily
enough that as things were it was every one for himself.  No one was
going to risk his life to hunt her up and drag her forth from the
pile of doomed cars.

The train had been crossing a river when the crash came.  There was
water down below, black and terrifying in the glare of flame that was
leaping like great tongues among the ruins just ahead.  She could not
tell if the cause of the accident had been a broken bridge or a
collision, and knew little about such things to judge.  The cars were
piled one upon another in wild confusion, and the Pullman in which
she was immured was standing on its forward end almost
perpendicularly.  The engine was overturned and fire was creeping
upward and threatening the whole mass; while below, the great black
stretch of water reflected the sight, making doubly terrible every
feature.

Jean drew back and attempted to look out into the car, but the
curtains were jammed tight by some heavy object which had fallen
against them, and she could get no idea of the situation on that
side.  When she at last succeeded in pulling the curtain away enough
to look she saw only a dark precipice below, with writhing forms and
jumbled shapes.  No one seemed to have thought of any way of escape
for the passengers, or to be making any attempt to get them out
before it was too late.  The shouts and cries that came from below
had no authority among them.  It was plain that the only hope of
escape was through the broken window and down into that abyss of
water and fire below.

Jean drew back and felt carefully around for her shoes.  She could
not take much with her, and she must work rapidly.  The shoes and
little handbag were almost under her, and she drew on the shoes,
fastening a button or two.  She hesitated a second with her hand on
the precious bag.  All her money, her trunk check and her little bits
of jewelry were in it.  She must save them if she could.  Those
papers that had been trusted to her were there also.  Quickly she
stuffed the bag within the breast of her garments and fastened it
there with a large safety pin, with which she had fastened the berth
curtain the night before, when a refractory button kept coming
undone.  Her heart gave a leap of excitement.  Now, in her need, she
remembered it, and, groping, found it there in the semi-darkness, big
enough to be found when wanted, and to hold the bag in safety.

She gave one frightened look out the window at the growing, widening
horrors below, and then began slowly, cautiously to creep through,
feet first.  It was a dangerous and painful task, as there was much
glass still adhering firmly to the window frame, and she found that
she had to draw back at first and hunt up her hair brush with which
to break away the sharp edges and make the opening large enough.

It seemed an hour, though in reality it was but a moment or two,
before she finally succeeded in getting out of the window, so that
she clung, suspended, both arms still inside the berth, but her body
hanging over the abyss of black depths mingled with flames.

Dark shapes were moving about down there, dark, moaning creatures
were dropping with sickening splashes into the water.  She dared not
look to see if they rose.  Her head grew light, and she felt her
fingers slipping.  Her strength would not hold her long, and she was
almost on the point of trying to creep back inside the berth when a
long cry as of the lost, mingled with moans and screams of women and
children, arose from below, and she saw a great sheet of fire leap up
and lick the lower end of the very car to which she clung.  She could
feel the heat of it where she was, and but for the slight inclination
of the car it would have been between her and the water.

With a low moan of horror she closed her eyes and let herself drop.
Down, down, she felt herself falling, through æons of time and space,
and knew that she was wondering how her mother would bear it when she
heard.  Then the shock of the water, and darkness closed over her in
a smothering chill.




CHAPTER III

She came up again gasping, choking, aware of the shouts and the
noise, of the struggling figures and dropping objects; aware that she
was only one more in the way and might better have stayed where she
was; then struck out feebly; but something fell upon her head,
something soft like a-pillow perhaps, but enough to put her under
water again, and she felt that this was the end.

When she could get her breath again a strong arm was pulling her away
from the crowd and noise.  There were things in the way, people and
heavy objects, but she was being steered through them all, out of the
labyrinth of horror and into dark, still waters.

There followed a long stretch of toiling through the water, which
seemed like ages, when her breath came in gasps, and her heart seemed
pounding her very life away as she ploughed through the blackness,
making a brave effort to keep up with the strong, steady strokes
beside her, though scarcely aware of what she was doing.  Life seemed
going from her ebb by ebb and it was not worth while to try to hold
on to it any longer, and yet the memory of her mother's fears kept
her trying.  After that she kept on, unconscious of anything save
that she must keep going, she must, she must--till finally even that
dim impulse flickered out and the water flowed about her very soul;
softly, dreamily, possessingly.  Yet still she was drawn on and on
through the blackness to a distant shore.

He dragged her up on the bank at last, the man who had saved her out
of the chaos of peril and brought her with him at the expense of his
own almost exhausted strength.  He was gasping and all but finished,
himself; when he dropped beside her among the tall reeds that served
to shelter them from the night, and for a few moments they lay quiet,
passive; the girl unconscious, the man panting for breath and unable
as yet to think what to do next; two stranger souls in common peril,
knowing naught of each other or of what was before them.

In a moment, however, the chill of the night roused the man, and he
shivered and sat up.  Whoever it was that he had saved--a woman--her
long hair and trammelling garments had already told him that--she
would die if she lay long in that condition.  What could he do?

He shivered again and got up.  He shook the water from himself.  His
splendid strength reasserted itself, and his breath was steady now.
He was surprised that even a swim like that, encumbered as he was
with heavy clothing and shoes, and bearing another helpless creature,
should have knocked him out so completely.  Then he reflected that he
had lost much sleep during the past few days; still, that was not
enough to make him feel so worthless.  He shook himself again and
stretched his muscles, as he used to do on the football field in his
nearby boyhood days, after a knockout, when he heard the call back
into the game.  If ever there was a call to come back into the game
it was now, for this woman would die if he did not do something at
once.

The night was wild and chill.  Across the river, farther away than he
dreamed they had come, the sky was lurid with the fire that flared
grotesquely against the darkness.  The current must have carried them
downstream as they crossed.  He had thought to go back and help save
others so soon as he had this one safe, but the way was far and this
woman was apparently helpless, perhaps unconscious, or at least
exhausted.  If she lay here in her wet garments she would die from
the cold.  He must get her to her feet and keep her warm somehow.

Stooping, he lifted her light weight and bore her farther up the bank
into the woods, then laid her down on the ground and knelt to listen
to her heart.  It was beating weakly.  If only he had fire or
stimulant or both!  Perhaps there was a house somewhere near.  He
would carry her a little way and see.  So he picked her up again,
holding her close to keep her warm, and struggled on through the
thick undergrowth in the darkness.

That night was an experience to be remembered through a lifetime.
The young strength of the man seemed to revive with the necessity,
and he carried the woman a long distance before, with the warmth of
his body and the motion of the going, the girl came to her senses and
was able to walk for herself.

For the first instant of her waking to consciousness her soul seemed
to stand still with horror.  Where was she and who was carrying her?
What would happen to her?  Would she ever see her home and friends
again?  The questions rushed madly through her mind and almost
paralyzed her thoughts for an instant.  Then memory reasserted
itself.  All the facts of the disaster as she had seen them, came
back.  She knew that whoever was carrying her must have saved her out
of kindness.  She knew that he must have had to swim alone during at
least a part of the way through the water, for she could distinctly
remember, now, the horror of being unable to keep up any longer.
Then there was something else, a kindly, strong, impersonal clasp
that made her unafraid.  After a minute she signified her ability to
walk, and he set her down at once, yet held her arm and put his own
about her for support.

"If you can walk it will keep you warm," he said briefly; and with no
apology for his arm about her he hurried her on.  It was all she
could do to keep up with his pace, and when her feet faltered he
seemed to almost lift her from the ground as he still strode on.

"We must keep going," he said again, as if he had no more breath to
waste in words.  On and on they went, but still they did not come to
any human habitation.  Finally, when he saw that she could go no
further, and that she needed rest, he made her sit down in a
sheltered place behind some trees.  Later, when she was almost
asleep, she knew her head was resting against his shoulder.  Once in
the night she awoke and saw a fire blazing near her, and realized
that a man's coat was spread over her and she was warm and
comparatively dry.  There was no one in sight, but she heard a step
not far away and the crackling of breaking branches.  She did not
wonder how the fire came.  She slept again.

It was in the early dawn that she awoke sharply as if she had been
called, and stretching her stiff limbs looked wildly about her,
startlingly aware of the night that had passed and her strange
isolation with an unknown man.

He lay upon the ground at the other side of the fire which had been
piled high with wood and was burning beautifully, his strong fine
figure stretched wearily at full length, the brown curly hair tumbled
back from his bronzed face, which in spite of its soil and grime
showed a manly beauty.  The utter weariness and relaxation of his
body made him seem like a boy.

The girl looked and wondered, and turned away to remember.  He must
have had to swim with her quite a distance, and drag her to land
after she ceased to help herself.  Also he must have carried her a
long journey.  He had upheld her when she walked beside him, and had
sat against a tree and made her lean against him part of the time
while she slept.  Then how did he get that fire?  Some mystery known
to woodcraft no doubt.  She glanced at herself with the thick brown
coat tucked carefully about her still.  She touched it softly, almost
reverently with her finger-tips.  It was dry!  He had contrived to
dry it and put it about her!

She looked over at the man again.  He wore a brown flannel shirt and
heavy trousers like the coat.  He must have been cold himself without
his coat while she slept in comfort.  And he had stayed awake all
night to keep the fire going to dry her things and keep her warm!

There were tears in her eyes as her glance lingered on the boyish
face.  She pictured writing to her mother what he was like, this
strong man like an angel who had saved her.  Then she shuddered at
the thought of the wreck and all she had gone through.  What would
have been her fate if he had not put his arm beneath her when she was
sinking?

Presently, as the dawn crept higher up the sky and lit the world with
rose and golden light, she stole shyly from her couch under the tree
and, stepping softly, came to where he was and tucked the coat
carefully about him, as he lay, one cheek pillowed on his arm.  Her
hand brushed lightly against his hair, and she marvelled at its
softness--like a baby's.  His skin, too, had that clear ruddy glow of
perfect health, even beneath the grime of the night.  She looked down
on him with wonder and a great gratitude that seemed to almost
overwhelm her.  Perhaps all people felt so toward men who had saved
their lives; but Jean Grayson had never before seen a man who seemed
one-half so strong and great and good as this mere boy looked to her
now in the early light of morning, asleep upon the ground and soundly
unaware of her tender ministration.

She slipped away quietly without wakening him, and stood a moment
looking about her upon the strange unknown world, wondering where she
was.  What State was this?  She could not even be sure of that.  Then
she looked down at herself.

She wore the long black Pullman robe of soft silk, sadly draggled now
and torn in two or three places.  How beautiful and fine it had been
but a few short hours before!  And her other pretty clothes that had
been bought and made so carefully at the cost of such family
sacrifice?  Were they all gone?  Would her trunk burn up?  Or had it
gone on ahead of her when she had stopped to visit her friends and so
escaped destruction?  But she dismissed the thought as unworthy of
one who had but just escaped with her life.  What were clothes beside
life?  But how was she to go on with her journey looking like this?
Her pretty travelling gown!  She felt a pang for that.  Well, she
must do the best she could.

Her hair was the worst of all, but she could put that right.  Her
precious handbag!  She put her hand to her breast to be sure it was
there safe.  Yes, it was still fastened to her clothing, though the
pin had torn away and there was but a small hold of the cloth still
in it.  She pulled it out and examined it, seated behind a tree away
from the fire and the sleeping man.  Yes, the bag was safe, and its
contents, but its beauty was gone, for the thin leather finish was
blistered and peeling from the inner lining.  The things inside were
all there, even the strange man's leather case, wrapped in a wet pulp
of paper.  She took the paper off and threw it from her; then
realizing how few worldly goods she was now possessed of, she reached
and spread the paper out to dry.  It would be needed, of course.

Her small store of money was safe, and her bits of pins and watch,
the little timepiece ticking bravely on as if it were alive and
trying to be cheerful under adverse circumstances.

Jean took out her combs and hair pins which she had stowed in the
pocket of her handbag that they might be easily found in the morning,
and felt rich indeed to have them.  They would assist very materially
in her toilet.

With the aid of the combs she presently had her hair soft and shining
in its accustomed coils and fluffy masses, for fortunately for her
appearance that morning, her hair was of the kind that tries to curl
in spite of floods and winds, and it fluffed its prettiest with the
first rays of the sun glinting over it.

The handbag held, among other things, a needle and both black and
white thread.  With their aid Jean mended the rents in her robe, and
managed to make herself look quite like a maiden of the present day.
Then wrapping the damp paper again about the displeasing leather case
she bestowed it with a shrug of dislike, in the disfigured bag once
more and started forth in search of water to wash off the stains of
the night.

Her hands were badly scratched and one had been bleeding.  She
remembered the glass and wondered now how she had escaped with as few
scratches as she had.

But water she could not find within sight of the fire and she dared
not go further lest she get lost.  She found, however, a dense growth
of bushes bearing great luscious berries, and though they were not
exactly like any berries with which she was familiar she decided that
they were probably edible, and gathered her hands full.  Then, coming
softly back near the fire, she looked around for a suitable place for
the breakfast table.  The sleeper had not awakened.  She went about
cautiously and found a great flat rock quite near where he lay that
would do beautifully.  Here she laid her berries on a dish of green
leaves, with their points all radiating from the centre and two large
leaves, one on each side, for plates.

Then remembering something, she opened her handbag again.

The day before, when her cousins had been taking her sightseeing,
they had treated her to ice cream soda, with which had been served a
tiny envelope of wax paper containing three small wafer crackers.
She had put hers in the bag, laughingly declaring that she would eat
them on the train when she was hungry, and one cousin had added her
envelope as well.  She had not thought of them when she opened it
before, but now she hurried to bring them forth.  Of course they
would be spoiled!  But no--the envelopes were still about them, and
though somewhat damp they had retained their shape and looked
exceedingly good to a hungry mortal.

Eagerly she set them forth, three on each leaf-plate, and hurried
back to the bush to get more berries.

Either the soft stepping feet as they went lightly through the grass,
or the falling of a stick into the ashes of the fire disturbed the
sleeper, for he awoke suddenly and looked about him.

The girl was gone!  That was his first thought.

The look of boyishness fell away from him in a flash, and he rose to
his feet and gazed about him anxiously, alertly, as if he feared
danger near.  Then his eyes fell on the flat rock with its mimic
banquet spread forth!  A flood of wonder and delight swept into his
face and a great tenderness, such as no one of his friends or foes
ever dreamed would be hid away anywhere in his nature.  He had never
played dolls on a rock with some little girl, and moss and acorns for
carpet and dishes, but the "playhouse" spirit was there in his heart
and leaped at once into consciousness.  A table for two!  The woman
had provided a meal even in the wilderness!

He had been turning about in his mind how he was to get something to
eat with neither powder nor hook, and here she had been quicker than
he and breakfast was all prepared!

Something stirred in Jasper Holt's heart that he had not known was
there, a longing for companionship in his life and home; the table
set for two and someone to care!  He had never felt its need before
and he did not call it by that name now--he merely experienced a
strangely beautiful thrill at the new possibilities that life
suddenly revealed to him; something higher and better and infinitely
sweeter than any of the ambitions and ideals he had hitherto
entertained.

He was still standing, gazing in wonder at the table, when the quick
crackling of a twig made known her return.




CHAPTER IV

She stood for an instant, framed in the opening of the trees, her
eyes bright, her lips parted, her cheeks pink with the exertion of
picking the berries.  Both her hands were full of the fruit.

"Oh, good morning!" she said shyly before he could think what to say,
"I hope I didn't waken you.  I am sure you needed to sleep longer."

His eyes glowed with admiration, and he stood startled at her beauty,
marvelling that she had accomplished a toilet with so little at her
command.

"How about you?" he said, watching her with admiring glance, "You
didn't need any sleep at all, I suppose.  You were just about all in
last night and no mistake."

"Yes, I guess I was," she answered penitently, "and I'm afraid I gave
you a lot of trouble, not being able to walk when I should.  I can
never thank you enough!  You saved my life, of course!  I never
should have got to shore----"

"Forget it!" he said with a smile, "it was nothing."

"And you had to carry me a long distance, I am sure you did.  I can
remember a long time when I know I was not walking.  You must be worn
out!"

"Why, you're not heavy," he said amusedly, eyeing her slender frame.
"I could carry you a good deal farther than that and not play out.
I'm glad to see you look so rested this morning.  I didn't expect it
after what you went through.  I see you have your nerve with you.  It
was a pretty nervy thing you did, you know, that stunt of dropping
out the window.  I had just got out myself further down and climbed
on shore to see if there was anything I could do for anyone, when I
saw you drop, and I thought you were gone for sure.  There were rocks
and timbers all around there and heavy things falling, and I thought
I saw your finish."

"And so you came and rescued me!" she said, with a look of gratitude
that brought a flush over his strong, tanned face.

"Oh, I just floated over that way to see if I could pick up anybody.
I couldn't tell who I was fishing out when I took hold of you, there
were so many sounds and things around."

"Well, I--I can't thank you enough now," she said, and there was a
glisten of tears in her eyes.  "I know it was wonderful what you did."

"Oh, forget it!" he said again, laughing lightly.  "It was bad enough
all around, and we were lucky to get off as we did.  But we aren't
out of the woods yet.  We'd better let bygones be bygones for the
present anyway.  Don't you want to sit down?"

Jean smilingly acquiesced, dropping down beside the rock with her
berries, and leaning over to arrange them with the rest.

"These ought to be washed," she said as she arranged them on the leaf
plate in the centre, "but I couldn't find any water."

"Water won't be so hard to find, but we haven't anything to put it
in," he answered laughing, "and besides, we oughtn't to mind a little
dirt after all we've been through.  I doubt if the berries I usually
get are washed anyway.  But if I had anything to carry it in, I'd
find some water.  I haven't even a hat----"

"Why, I had a little drinking cup, but I don't remember whether it's
in my bag or not.  Perhaps I put it in the suit case, though I think
I left it in my bag."

She laid down the last berries, and wiping the stains from her
fingers on the grass she opened the bag which she had slipped through
the belt of her robe and made to hang at her side.  It was rather
full and when it was opened the leather wallet, wrapped in its damp
paper, fell out on the ground, and the paper came unfolded, revealing
what it contained.

The young man stooped gravely, a dark flush rising to his cheeks, and
picked it up.  He did not look startled nor surprised and she noticed
nothing strange in his manner as he handed it to her.  Afterward she
wondered at that.

The cup did not materialize, but there were the two little wax paper
envelopes, which might hold water.  She held them out to him, and
looking up, their eyes met.

"Why, you are the man who sat opposite to me in the day coach," she
said in pleased surprise, "I didn't recognize you before without your
hat on.  But I remember thinking when I went to the other car that
you had a face that one need not be afraid of.  I was a little
frightened by the old man who sat with you--he spoke to me--but when
I saw you I was not afraid any more.  Mother says I'm always going by
my intuitions, but I think this time you've proved them true.  I knew
you were a person to be trusted."

He looked at her wonderingly, a strange expression of wistfulness
crossing his face.

"People don't often feel that way about me," he said in a strange low
tone that seemed to hide a good deal more behind the words than was
said.  "I guess you're the first person who has trusted me in a long
time."

"Oh," she said, looking at him seriously, "I guess you don't know--or
else--" she paused as if in doubt whether to finish the sentence.

"Or else what, please?" he asked with compelling gaze.

"I was going to say or else they don't know you; but that sounds
rather bold for a stranger to say when I've only known you a few
hours.  But I've had opportunity to prove that what I thought about
you was true.  Perhaps it's that you do not always let people see the
nice things in you the way you have had to let me because of my need."

"Well, that's a new way of painting my character, I must say.  I
rather like it myself but I doubt if anybody would recognize it for
me.  I wouldn't mind being that way, believe me, and I thank you for
sizing me up in that style.  I'll think it over, but I'm afraid
you've got your characters mixed and I'm not in your line at all.
However, I'm glad you think so.  Now I'll see what I can do about
water."

He took the two envelopes as if they had been cut glass goblets and
walked away into the woods.  In a few minutes he returned with them
dripping, his own face ruddy with recent washing, and his curls still
damp and dark above his forehead; while the strong hands that held
the would-be cups were clean as water could make them.

"Would you like to wash your face?" he asked as he held out the cup
for her to drink.  "Never mind the berries, they are all right as
they are.  I'll show you the water and then come back to guard the
food.  We don't know what wild creature may find our table and clear
out with the whole set-out."

"Oh, would they do that?" laughed Jean, interested.  "Wouldn't that
be funny?"

"It might not be so funny if we don't strike a ranch pretty soon,"
said Holt, looking serious.  "We need all that breakfast to help us
on our way after the night we've spent."

"I will not wash my face until after breakfast," said Jean decidedly,
coming back to the rock and seating herself by one of the
leaf-plates.  "Sit down, please, and break your fast for we are not
running any risks on this trip.  I want to get to a telegraph office
and send word to my mother and father.  They will hear about the
accident and will be terribly frightened about me.  You won't mind my
eating with unwashed hands, will you?"

"I should worry!" declared Holt, seating himself on the other side of
the rock with the ease of one who is as much at home on the ground as
on a chair.

"These crackers are a little limp," said Jean, "but it was the best I
could do considering that they were submerged for a long time."

"They're great," said Holt, sampling one, "but how did you happen to
have them?"

She told him merrily of her visit the day before and how she had
saved them.

"They're all you have!" said Holt suddenly, "you may need the rest of
them before we are through.  Put these away and keep them till you
need them.  I'll just eat the berries.  I'm used to going without for
a long time."

"Wasn't your life the only one you had when you risked it to save
me?" asked Jean, looking at him earnestly.  "I guess you'll get half
of all there is or I won't have any."

Holt looked at her admiringly.

"That's all right, but I'd rather you saved them.  You're a woman."

"That may be all right, but I won't," said Jean decidedly, "and I
won't eat another bite until you eat yours."

He looked at her with the glow of appreciation growing in his eyes.
He never had seen a girl like this.

"You're all white!" he said at last.  "You're the real thing.  You're
a good fellow.  I guess we're partners, then."

He held out his hand as he would have done to a man, and the girl,
with a quick appreciation of his words, laid her small berry-stained
hand in the big, hard one.

"Thank you," she said earnestly, "That rather puts us on an equality,
doesn't it?  But I'm not so foolish as to think we really are.  I
know it's only a very little bit that I can do on this expedition.
You do all the big, grand, hard things.  But you mustn't deny me the
chance to do the little things I can do; and sharing, or even going
without sometimes, belongs to my part.  I haven't forgotten yet that
you saved my life."

He looked at the little hand wonderingly and held it gently in his
own, with just a slight, lingering, wistful closing of his strong
fingers around it; then let it go as though he were afraid he might
crush it, it seemed to him so frail and exquisite and fine.

"I can tell you one thing," he said, "you're some improvement on the
last partner I had."  Jean gave him a swift, relieved look.  "That
horrid old man?" she asked comprehendingly.  He nodded, but searched
her face keenly, as if he would make sure of something.  He seemed
satisfied, however, with the frank look in her clear eyes and said no
more.  Perhaps he hoped she would confide in him--or perhaps he liked
her all the better that she did not--who knows?  They ate their
meagre breakfast hungrily, yet lingered over it happily.  The morning
seemed to each as an exquisite treasure of time loaned to them for
this once, and there fell a charm upon them that neither quite
understood; only they were conscious of joy in being alive and having
each other.  The experiences of the night and the unusual
surroundings did away with all conventionalities and feelings of
embarrassment they would otherwise have had in their strange plight;
and their laughter mingled and rang out among the trees joyously on
that early beautiful morning after the disaster.

He led her down to the stream to wash while he made a basket of
leaves, pinned together with stems, and filled it full of berries.

"We may need them for dinner," he remarked as he went back to the
bushes.

Jean finished her ablutions, and, washing out her handkerchief,
filled it also with berries; and thus provided with a lunch, they
started on their way.

After coming out of the woods they climbed first to the highest point
of ground near them and surveyed the landscape in every direction,
but nothing more serene on a summer morning could be found anywhere
than was before them.  Turn which way they would there was no sign of
disaster or wreck.  The soft, green hills on every side hid the
secret of its location, and the world lay spread before them without
a hint of ravage or distress.  There was absolutely no way to tell
direction except in a general way by the sun; and where the wreck had
been it was impossible even to speculate, for they could not tell how
they had come in the darkness.

This gave a new aspect to their situation.  Holt had been thinking
during the night that if they could work their way back to the wreck
they would probably reach home more quickly, for surely by this time
a relief train must have come.  But now he saw that it was useless to
consider that longer.  They must just press on till they came to a
house, where possibly they could procure horses, and certainly
information as to their whereabouts.  There was a reason why he
wished to get back to the world as quickly as possible; yet something
taught him to be glad that necessity had given him this day or part
of a day, whichever it was to be, with this girl.

He looked down almost tenderly at the bright, trusting face that
smiled up at him so bravely.  He had a sudden comprehending glimpse
of what it must be to a girl, such as he could see she was, to be
dropped down into a strange world, far from home and protection, in
company with a man about whom she knew nothing.

"Tough luck," he said, answering the question in her eyes, "but don't
you worry, we'll get out sooner or later."

"I'm not worrying," she answered earnestly, "but I was wishing we
knew how to send a wireless to my father.  I wonder if some day they
won't perfect the system so that people can send messages from
anywhere without any instruments, if they just know how."

"That would be great," said Holt, thoughtfully, "I'd send one this
minute to the nearest inhabited point for two good saddle horses.
Can you ride?"

"A little.  I've never had much opportunity.  Father used to keep a
horse, but when we moved to our present home he had to give it up.
There wasn't really any need for it.  But I'm to ride while I'm away
visiting my sister."  Her face brightened at the thought, and then
clouded.  "That is if we ever get there----"

"Oh, we'll get there all right," said Holt easily, taking his
bearings and deciding which way to strike out.  "You're Mrs.
Harrington's sister, aren't you?"

"Why yes, how did you know?" said the girl with a ring of relief in
her voice.  "You know my sister, then?"  This was almost equivalent
to an introduction, and she knew her mother would be particular about
that.

"I heard you tell the conductor," he said.  "Shall we start?  We've
got a good journey to travel judging by the look of things.  This
way," and he led her down the slope out into the open where they
could see where they were going.

"But you wouldn't have remembered all this time if you hadn't known
who she was," she flashed back, smiling.  "How pleased Eleanor will
be when she knows one of her own friends took care of me and saved my
life."

Holt's face darkened suddenly and he did not answer at once.  When he
did his voice was cold and hard like a sudden storm on a sunny day.

"I don't think she'd exactly call me her friend!"

His eyes were narrowed, and his chin was set with a haughty lift.

"Well, acquaintance, then," said Jean brightly.  "Eleanor is a lot
older than you, of course.  She was married and went away from home
when I was just a tiny girl.  I haven't seen her all these years, and
of course she's changed a great deal."

"Yes, I suppose you'd call us acquainted," answered Holt, still in
that queer, hard voice.  Jean felt it intuitively, but talked on,
feeling her way to surer ground.

"I wonder if my sister has ever mentioned you in her letters," she
said brightly.  "She tells me about all the people."

"Possibly!"  You could have cut ice with the sharpness of his tone.
Then he added quietly:

"My name is Holt.  Jasper Holt!"

He watched her with wide challenging eyes, but although there was a
puzzled look in her face the name evidently told her nothing.

"Jasper!  What a beautiful name!  I always thought that was the most
beautiful word.  The walls of the heavenly city are built of jasper,
you know."

"No, I didn't know," he spoke slowly, almost worshipfully.  This
truly was a new kind of girl.  A citizen, more like, of that heavenly
city about which she spoke with such assurance as if it were an
actual place, than like a mortal girl.  His face was softened, made
tender, as he looked at her, and saw the morning shining in her eyes.
His haughtiness fell away, and all the goodness and native truth and
purity that were hidden in his soul came out and sat upon his face.
The people who thought they knew Jasper Holt would not have
recognized him thus, walking beside the girl and looking down upon
her as one looks upon the face of an angel.

Jean looked up, seeing in him only the beauty of his true self; and
looking, trusted, and was not afraid.




CHAPTER V

He helped her over rough places and up the steep climbs.  Hand in
hand they ran down the slopes like two children out for play; their
merry laughter ringing out, forgetful of the recent dangers through
which they had passed; forgetful, too, of perilous possibilities
before them.  It was enough that the day was fresh, the sun was
shining, their strength renewed, and they were together.  Each was
occupied most with the fact of the other and the day.

They ate their berries before the heat of the noon was fully come,
and hurried on.  But Holt could see that his companion was growing
weary, for the excitement of the night before had left her shaken,
and more and more she faltered and leaned heavily upon him up the
hills.  Then he found a quiet resting place under some trees and bade
her sleep, and while she slept he hovered not far away.

He found a pool where by a skill he had long practised he could catch
some very small fish; and with due patience he at last secured enough
to make a meal.  Then with infinite pains and his knowledge of
woodcraft, he accomplished a fire once more and cooked the fish, so
that when she awoke there was dinner spread under a tree--broiled
fish, with clear water from the brook to drink.

Holt was in a hurry to get on, for he was growing uneasy about the
direction they were taking.  It seemed as if they were off the
regular line of habitation and travel.  Was it possible he had turned
too much to the north and was set to enter the desert at the most
remote and lonely part, where they might travel for days without
meeting anyone?

He changed the direction slightly and they started on again, the
young man watching the sun anxiously from time to time.  And now he
kept the girl's arm, touching her elbow lightly to be ready with help
when it was needed.  Often he drew her arm within his own and fairly
lifted her over hard places; and so they came to higher ground and
looked out before them once more.  The sun was lower now, and growing
redder as it went down with premonition of the night.  The man could
see that the girl's steps were slower, and that her face was pale
with weariness, though she said not a word and plodded cheerfully on
by his side.  He could see that she looked anxiously about on all
sides whenever they came to the higher ground, and knew that she was
thinking all this time of her mother.

The fair, weary face and bright, determined countenance touched his
heart deeply, and brought out all the latent tenderness in his
nature; and there arose in him a great longing to help her that made
him wonder at himself.

At last as they reached another slight elevation he looked to the
west and to his relief saw a small house with horses and cattle
moving about in the fields.  He showed it to her and her eyes lighted
with joy.

"Oh, that is so good!  I was worried, for I know I'm a burden.  You
would have gone the distance twice if you had been alone."

His hand touched her arm more reverently close.  "I am glad I was not
alone," he said earnestly.  "And I'm glad you were not alone."

She looked up to meet his eyes and there leaped from each to the
other a wonderful realization of the beauty of the companionship they
had held that day.

"Yes, I am glad I was not alone," she said with deep feeling, "for,
oh, it would have been dreadful!  And this has been--beautiful," she
finished, and wondered at herself for speaking so freely.  Then each
was suddenly silent at the appalling realization that the free
companionship of the day was almost at an end.  They were coming to
the world of convention and form again, where words and actions were
weighed and motives questioned.  There had been nothing of that here,
for necessity and common peril had blotted them out of existence for
the time, and it had been blessed.  Now the thought came
simultaneously to both.  Would they ever see one another again and be
friends?

The way wound down into a ravine, and the heavy growth of trees
shadowed the path.  It was rough and he guided her tenderly,
respectfully, as one might guide a little child one loved.  She felt
his care in every step she took, and her heart responded gratefully
to his gentleness.  Her own father could not have been more
thoughtful; and there was nothing familiar or presuming in his touch.
He might have been a mother, the tenderness he showed.  Perhaps Jean
felt it more because she was so very tired, and realized her lonely
position now that night was coming on again.

In the valley they came to the bank of a stream, deep and turbulent;
and standing upon its brink, looking either way, there seemed no
possible ford.  How deep it was they could not guess, but there was
plainly a strong current.

Holt stood a moment, surveying the barrier to their progress, walked
a few steps up the bank and down, and looked up at the westering sky.
Then he deliberately walked out into the stream.

The girl on the bank caught her breath but said nothing.  Must they
swim across?  Was there no other way?  She watched Holt standing,
strong and manly, in the middle of the stream, the water above his
waist.  Presently, when he had gone more than half way across he
turned and came back to her.

She was white with excitement, but her lips were set and her eyes
were bright with the intention of doing his bidding.

"I am sorry.  There is no other way, and we must hurry, for the sun
is getting low.  We should reach that house before dark."

He stooped and gathered her in his strong arms, lifting her shoulder
high, and stalked out into the stream before she knew what he was
doing.

"Oh, please, I can walk as well as you," she deprecated.

"Put your arms around my neck, please," he commanded, and waded in,
holding her high and dry above the water.

She obeyed instantly, in trust and shy wonder, and the water rose
about them, but did not touch her.

Once, when they were in the middle of the stream, Holt's foot slipped
and for an instant it seemed as though he would lose his balance, but
he lifted her the higher and almost instantly recovered himself.  In
a moment more they had crossed the stream, and he had set her down
upon the bank and was shaking the water from his garments as if it
were a common thing which he had done and he enjoyed it.  She looked
down at herself.  Not a shred of her garments was wet, while he was
drenched almost to the arm-pits.

"You are all wet!" she exclaimed, conscience-stricken.

"You wouldn't expect me to keep dry in all that, would you?" he
asked, with his eyes dancing.

Then they laughed like two children, and a frightened chipmunk ran
chattering away in the trees.

"Are you all right?" he asked solicitously.  "Are you perfectly dry?"
His voice was husky with emotion and his eyes tender.

"Of course I'm dry," she answered dubiously, as if half ashamed of
the fact.  "Why wouldn't I be when I'm treated like a baby?  It seems
to me, you didn't quite keep to the terms of our partnership."

"This was one of the big things," he said, "only I didn't want you to
know it.  To tell you the truth, I didn't know whether that stream
was fordable or not; and, besides, I knew that if you got your
clothes wet again it would hinder you in walking.  Come, we must make
that house before dark.  I'm hungry, aren't you?  And we're pretty
sure to find bacon and corn bread at least.  How does that sound?"

"Good!" she cried, laughing, and took the hand that was held out to
her.  Together they ran on over the rough ground toward supper and
rest.

But the way was longer than they thought, and Holt had not been able
to calculate on the slow steps of the girl who was unused to such
long tramps, nor to going without adequate food.  The sun went down
and the darkness was upon them before they were anywhere near the
little house.

Once Jean stumbled and almost fell, and a sound like a half sob came
from her throat as she clutched at his arm to save herself.  It was
then he picked her up like a tired child and carried her over the
rough ground, until she protested so vigorously that he was forced to
set her down and both stopped to rest.  For, indeed, Holt's own
strength was somewhat spent by this time, though he showed no outward
sign of fatigue, having been trained in a school that endures until
it drops.

By this time they felt as if they had known each other for years, tor
there is nothing like a common peril and a common need to make souls
know one another, and to bring out the true selfishness or
unselfishness of each character.  Because these two had been
absolutely forgetful of self, each felt for the other a most
extraordinary attraction and reverence.

As they sat silently under the stars, resting, it came to their minds
how far from strangers they now seemed, and yet how little they knew
about each other's lives; and they felt they needed not to know
because of what each had been to the other during the night and the
day that were passed.

When they started on their way again arm in arm, they walked silently
for a time, marvelling at what the day had brought them in knowledge
of the other's fineness.

"I cannot be mistaken," thought Jean.  "He is fine and noble--all
that a man ought to be.  He looks as if he had never done anything
wrong, yet is strong enough to kill the devil if he would."

By this time the little house in the distance had put a light in its
window, and guided them twinklingly to its door, where three great
dogs greeted them from afar and disputed their entrance.

The house was not very large, only three rooms.  A man and his wife
and some hired hands huddled around a kerosene light, the men smoking
and playing cards; the wife knitting silently in the rear.

They looked up curiously to hear the stranger's story, half
incredulous.  They had not heard of any railroad accident.  They
lived twenty miles from the railroad and went to town only once a
fortnight.

"This your wife?" questioned the householder of Holt.

Jean's face flamed scarlet as a new embarrassment faced her.  She had
not thought of proprieties until now.  Of course they existed even in
the wilderness.

Holt explained haughtily.

"H'm!" said the man still incredulous.  "Any more in your party?
Wal, my woman'll take keer your woman fer t'night, an' in the mornin'
we ken talk business.  Yas, I've got horses, but I need 'em."  The
man looked cunningly from one to the other of the men.

Jean looked at Holt, and thought how far above these people he seemed
as he stood haughtily by the door in his wet and draggled clothing,
with the bearing of a young king.

"Oh, I can pay for the horses," said Holt, "and see that they are
returned, too, if that is what is the matter."  And he pulled out a
roll of bills and threw several carelessly on the table.

"Wal, that alters the case," said the man more suavely, "of course,
fer a consideration----"

"Can we get some supper?" asked Holt, cutting him short.  "We've had
very little to eat all day, and this lady is tired and hungry."

The man's wife bustled forward.

"Fer the land sake!" she exclaimed, "hungry this time o' night?  We
ain't got much ready, but there was some corn bread and po'k lef from
supper, ef they'll do.  The men is powah'ful eatahs."

She set out the best her house afforded, eyeing Jean's tattered silk
robe enviously between trips to the cupboard.  The men went on with
their card game and Jean and Holt ate in silence.  The girl was
beginning to dread the night and to wish for the silence of the
starlit world and the protection of her strong, true friend.  She did
not like the look of the men who fumbled the dirty cards and cast
bold glances in her direction.

She was even more frightened when she learned the arrangements that
were to be made for the night.  She was assigned to a bunk in a small
closet-like room opening from the big room in which they were all
sitting--which appeared to be kitchen, parlor and dining-room
combined, and was to be, for that night at least, sleeping room for
Holt and the other men, several rolls of army blankets being the only
visible provision made for their comfort.

Holt managed to get opportunity to whisper to her as the men were
disputing over their game while the housewife retired to the guest
chamber to "red up."

"Don't you worry," he reassured her softly.  "I'll bunk across in
front of your door.  You can sleep and trust me."

She flashed up at him a bright, weary smile that sent a thrill of joy
through him and made him feel that nothing in all life could be
better than to defend this girl who trusted him.

In the early rose and gold of the morning Jean awoke to the smell of
cooking ham and the sizzle of eggs frying just the other side of her
thin partition, and knew that she had slept in safety under guard of
her new found friend.

"Jasper!  Jasper Holt!" said a strange sweet voice within her soul,
and she wondered at the beauty of the name and the thrill of
possession she felt in it.

Jean had a little money carefully sewed inside her clothing.  It was
to have done for her whole western trip and bought gifts for the dear
ones at home before her return.  Now she realized it was her fortune.
She made a bargain with the woman of the cabin for a khaki skirt and
blouse, of doubtful cut and shabby mien, but whole and clean.  For
these she gave two dollars and the remains of the once treasured, but
now tattered and travel-stained silk robe she wore.  And so it was as
a Western girl, in riding skirt and blouse, that she emerged from the
little closet where she had slept, but so wholly was she able to
subjugate her clothes, and so exquisitely did her flower face and
golden-brown hair set them off that they took on a style and beauty
entirely out of their nature; and their former owner stared in wonder
and sighed with envy as she beheld.  It had not been the silken
garment that made this girl a queen, but her own beauty of
countenance and regal bearing; for here were her own old clothes worn
like a royal robe, making the stranger lovely as the morning.

Holt looked at the girl in startled wonder when she appeared, so trig
and sweet in her travelling garb, ready for the next stage of her
journey, and trembled with joy at the day that was before him; albeit
the end of the journey would bring sadness and parting, he knew.  He
wanted to knock down the men who stared insolently, offering audible
comments on her complexion and bearing that made the swift,
frightened color come to her cheeks.  He ate his breakfast in haughty
silence, sitting between Jean and one of the men, and shielding her
as far as possible from any need of conversation save with her
hostess who waited on them all and hovered admiringly round her young
guest's chair with offers of molasses and mush that were fairly
overwhelming.

"Any need fer a clergyman?" asked the ugliest of the three men,
leaning forward across the table, his knife and fork held
perpendicular each side of his plate, a large piece of ham aloft on
his fork.  He gave an ugly wink at the others and they laughed
coarsely and meaningly.

"Yas, you could git the elder by goin' about ten mile out o' yer
way," added another, and devoted himself audibly to his thick cup of
muddy coffee.

Holt ignored these remarks and began asking questions of his host
about the crops and the exact location of the house with regard to
railroads, wondering meanwhile, if Jean understood their rough jokes,
and hoping she did not.

If she did she was serene with it all, and smiled her very sweetest
on her hostess, making her heart glad at the parting by the gift of a
pair of cheap, but pretty, little cuff pins that had been fastened on
the front of her travelling robe.

So they mounted and rode away, Jean like the queen of a girl that she
was, and her companion no less noble in his bearing.  The joy they
felt in the day and each other was only equalled by their own shyness
in speaking of it.




CHAPTER VI

They talked about many things that morning as they rode happily
toward Hawk Valley.  Holt felt no anxiety, now, about reaching there
by night, for he knew exactly where he was and how to get there.  He
had bargained with one of the men for fire-arms, and he could now
shoot enough to keep them from hunger even if they were delated.  He
had matches in his pocket and an old cow-boy hat on his head, and he
felt rested and fit for the journey.  For the first half of the way,
at least, he could give himself up to the bliss of a companionship
such as he had never known in the whole of his young life.
Reverence, awe, adoration were in his glance as he looked at the
girl, and a great, wistful sadness grew as the day lingered toward
evening.

They rode first straight down to the telegraph station which was
about fifteen miles from the settler's cabin, and sent reassuring
telegrams from the forlorn little office set out alone in the middle
of the prairie; one to Jean's father and mother back in the eastern
home, and one to her sister, Eleanor Harrington, in Hawk Valley.

"Don't worry about accident.  Am safe and well and shall reach Hawk
Valley to-night.--Jean" said the first message.  The second Holt
worded for himself, for he had left the girl outside the station on
her horse.  She had asked him to be sure and tell her sister that he
was with her so she would not worry, but the message he sent was:

"Safe and well, and on my way to you with a friend who will look out
for me.  Expect to reach Hawk Valley to-night.--Jean."

Enquiry concerning the accident brought little information.  The
wreck had been on the "other road" and the agent "hadn't heard much."
He "didn't know whether many lives were lost or not," and he "guessed
it was the engineer's fault, any how,--it usually was."

They rode on their way in happy converse.  Jean was led to tell of
her home life.  Not that Holt questioned her, but she seemed to love
to talk of home, and picture her family, her friends, the church
where her father preached, the companions of her girlhood, the
serious school life and church work to which she had been devoting
herself; and, above all, he saw and wondered over the sweet
confidence that existed between this girl and her parents.  A wistful
look came into his eyes as he thought what might have been his life
if someone had cared for him and trusted in him that way; or if he
had had a sister like this girl.

Suddenly, in the middle of the afternoon the girl looked up and
asked: "Will your mother worry?  Did you send her a telegram, too?"

He looked at her half startled.

"My mother?" he said in a strange, cold voice, "My mother never
worries about me.  She isn't that kind.  I doubt if she even knows
where I am these days.  I've been west for a long time.  Father died
and mother married again since I left home.  I don't suppose she
would even hear of the accident.  There's no one to care where I am."
There was a bitterness in the young voice and a hardness on the
handsome features that cast a pall over the beauty of the afternoon
for Jean.

"Oh," she said, looking at him earnestly.  "Oh, don't say that!  I'm
sure some one cares."

There were tears in her eyes.  He looked so noble and good to her,
and her heart went out to him utterly in his loneliness.  In that
moment she knew that she cared with all her heart; that she would
always care.  It was strange and wonderful, but she felt she would
always _care_!

He looked at her with wonder again and a yearning that he could not
hide.

"I believe _you_ would care!" he exclaimed.

She smiled through a sudden mist of tears.

"Yes, I should care, I couldn't help it," she said, "You have done so
much for me you know, and I--_know_ you so well----" she hesitated,
"I don't see how anybody who belonged to you could help caring."  Her
cheeks were rosy with the effort to say what she meant without
seeming unmaidenly.

His brow darkened.

"Belonged!" he said bitterly.  "Belonged!  Yes, that's it.  I don't
belong!  I don't belong anywhere!"

His voice was so different and so harsh that it almost frightened
her.  She watched him, half afraid as he brought his horse to a
sudden stop and looked about him.  Then he changed the subject
abruptly:

"This is a good place to camp for supper and rest," he said, as if he
had quite forgotten what they had been saying.

He swung down from the saddle, hobbled his horse, and came around to
her side to help her alight; but stood a moment looking earnestly,
tenderly into her eyes, and she looked back at him trustingly,
wonderingly with the worshipful homage a woman's eyes can hold for
the man who has won her tenderest thoughts.  She did not know she was
looking that way, bless you, no!  She would have been filled with
confusion if she had known it.  It was unconscious and the man knew
so and treasured her look the more for that.

"I believe you do care, now," he said in a voice filled with a sort
of holy awe that made the girl's heart leap up and the color flame
into her cheeks.

Then before she could answer or think to be embarrassed, he lifted
her reverently from the saddle and put her on the ground.

He hobbled her horse, unstrapped the pack of provisions and went off
to gather up firewood, but when he returned she was sitting where he
put her under the tree, her face buried in her hands, her slender
form motionless.

He stood for a moment and watched her, then came over and knelt down
beside her, and taking her hands gently from her face, looked into
the dewy depths of her sweet eyes and spoke:

"Don't!" he pleaded gently.  "Let's have supper now, and then we'll
talk it all out.  Will you come and help me make a fire?"

There was something in his strong, tender glance that helped her to
rise to his call.  A lovely smile grew in her eyes.  She let him help
her to her feet, and casting aside the reserved shyness that had
fallen over her like a misty veil, she ran here and there, gathering
sticks and helping to make the fire blaze; talking merrily about the
supper they were preparing just as she had done all day; but her
heart was in a tumult of wonder.

Holt shot a couple of rabbits and put them to roast before the fire.
Jean set herself to toast the soggy corn bread and make it more
palatable.  Their merry laughter rang out again and again as they
prepared their simple meal.  They were like two children playing
house.  No one looking on would have seen any difference in their
demeanor from what it had been all day.  It was only when Holt was
out in the open, shooting rabbits, that he allowed the sadness and
gloom to settle down upon his young face.  It was only when he was
away gathering more wood that Jean, left to watch the sputtering
rabbits, let the corn bread burn, while her face grew thoughtful, and
her eyes sweet with a tender light.

It was when the supper was eaten and the fire flickering low in the
dying light of sunset that Holt came and sat down beside the girl,
and again a great silence fell between them.

Holt had planned their home-coming to be in the dark.  For the girl's
sake he would not have witnesses to their arrival.  This
thoughtfulness sprang from finer feelings than the people of Hawk
Valley dreamed that he possessed.  There remained but a little over
an hour's ride now to reach Hawk Valley, and Holt did not mean they
should get there before nine o'clock at the earliest.

He sat gravely quiet, his strong hands folded across his raised
knees, his back against a tree, looking bravely, wistfully, off into
the distance.  He seemed a great deal older, now, with that grave,
sad expression.  Jean stole a glance at him now and then, as she
plucked at the vegetation about her, and wondered why this appalling
silence, which she seemed powerless to break, had so suddenly fallen
upon them.

Then the man's voice broke the stillness in a low tense tone.
"There's something I must tell you."

The very air seemed waiting to hear what he would say.  The girl
scarcely breathed.

"It wouldn't have been the square thing for me to tell you that I
loved you if I had been the only one that cared; but we've been
through all this together, and it's as if we had known each other for
years--and--_you care too_!  I can see it in your eyes.  I'm not
worthy of it--but you care--and it's up to me to help you stop it.
It would be an easier job, perhaps, if I were used to being trusted,
but it's an honest fact that you're the first respectable person that
has really trusted me since I can remember, and it comes hard----"

His voice broke as if an alien sob had wandered into his bronzed
throat.  A sob swelled in the girl's throat, too, and her little
briar-scratched hand stole out and just touched his arm reassuringly
with a feather glance of pressure, and withdrew as if to say: "I will
bear my part of this trouble, whatever it is--please don't suffer
more than your own part."

He turned at that and the cloud on his face cleared and brightened
into a smile that seemed to enfold her in his glance of tenderness,
yet he lifted not a finger to touch her.

"I love you!  _How_ I love you!" he said, in a low, lingering tone,
as if the speaking of the words were exquisite joy that he knew was
fleeting and must be treasured.

"I never knew there was a girl like you.  I loved you at once as soon
as I saw you in the train--but I knew, of course, you were not for
me.  I'm not fit for you--I'm not in your class at all--and I
wouldn't have dreamed of anything but worshipping you, even after
these days together--only you _care_!  You trust me!  That broke me
all up!  I'd give anything in this world if I could keep that and
take it to the end and die with it--to remember that look in your
eyes when you said you trusted me--and thought I was good--and all.
If you weren't going right where they know all about me and will tell
you, I'd never have opened my lips, I'd have stolen this one little
bit of trust and kept it for my own; for down in my heart I know it
isn't wrong, I know you may trust me.  I'd give my life to keep that
trust----"

He was looking straight into her clear eyes as he talked and his own
eyes were clear and good, showing his strong, true spirit at its
best.  The appeal in his voice suddenly went to the girl's heart.
With a growing uneasiness she had listened to his words, and she felt
that she could bear no more.  The tears rushed to her eyes and she
put up her hands to cover her face.

"Please.  Tell me quick!" she breathed softly.

Puzzled, thrilled with the wonder of her tears, and longing
inexpressibly to comfort her, he put out his hand awkwardly and laid
it on her bowed head bending over her as he might have done to a
child in trouble.

"There's nothing for you to feel bad about."  he said in a voice of
wonderful tenderness.  "I'm bearing this circumstance.  I just wanted
to be the one to tell you myself that I'm not what you think me.  I'm
not bad, really, the way I might be, but I've not been good, and I'm
not a gentleman, not the kind you're used to.  Nobody thinks I'm
worth anything at all.  Your people hate me, and would think it a
good thing if somebody would kill me, I know.  You see how it is that
I can't be like other men who love you.  I cannot ask you to marry
me; for after you've heard what your family will say about me you
won't look at me yourself--and I don't blame you.  It's all my own
fault, I suppose.  I can see it now, though I never thought so till I
looked in your eyes on the train.  If I had known a girl like you was
coming my way I'd have made things different--I'd have been
ready--but I didn't know.  Nobody ever told me!  And now it's too
late.  I'm not worthy of you."

He took his hand from her head and dropped back against the tree
again, a bitter expression on his face.

"Oh, don't," she pleaded softly, quick to see his changing mood,
"Please don't look like that.  Won't you tell me what you have done
that makes them all feel so about you?"

There was silence for a moment between them while the twilight grew
luminous with the coming of a pale, young moon battling with the
dying ruby of the sun.  So, in the holy of the evening he came to his
confession, face to face with his sins before the pure eyes of the
girl he loved.




CHAPTER VII

The stars were large and vivid above them, like tapers of tall angels
bent to light a soul's confession up to God.

The beautiful silence that brooded over the plain was broken now and
again by distant calls of some wild creature, but that only
emphasized the stillness and the privacy of the night.

The two whose souls were thus come so strangely and unexpectedly into
a common crisis of their lives sat awed and stricken before the
appalling irrevocableness of deeds that are past.

Jasper Holt broke the silence at last:

"I was never as bad as they thought I was."  he said in a broken
voice, though there was no hint in it of attempting to discount his
blame.  "They laid a lot of things at my door that I never thought of
doing--some things I would have scorned to do."  His voice was
haughty now with pride.  "I suppose it was my fault they thought I
did them.  I _let_ them think so--I grew to glory in their thinking
so, and sometimes helped it on just for the pleasure of feeling that
they, through their injustice, were more in the wrong than I.  I
suppose I had no right to do that.  At least I see now that for--your
sake--I should have kept my record clear."  He lifted his gray eyes
in the starlight to her face for one swift look and then went on:

"It was none of their business what I did though, and my theory
always has been to do as I pleased so long as I lived up to my creed.
For I had a creed, a kind of religion, if you want to call it that.
Put into a single word, perhaps nine-tenths of my creed is
Independence.  What people thought of me didn't come into my scheme
of life.  I thought it a slavery to bow to public opinion, and
gloried in my freedom.  It seemed a false principle without cause or
reason.  You see I never reckoned on your coming.  I thought I was
living my life just for myself.  I can see now that underneath all
the falseness of the world's conventionalities there runs some good
reason, and there may be circumstances where some of the things they
insist upon are right--even necessary.  This is one.  I never
considered anything like this.  I couldn't see any reason why I
should ever need to care what people thought of me, or to go out of
my way to make them think well of me.  I always relied on something
else to get me what I wanted, and so far it has not failed.  _They_
will tell you that.  They will let you know that I have not been
powerless because some men hated me--for though they have hated me
they have also feared me----"

The girl turned her eyes, tear-filled, and full of amazement, to look
at him, studying the fine outline of features against the starlit
background of the sky.  She could see the power in his face; power
with gentleness was what she had seen when she first looked at him;
but Hate!  Fear!  How could men so misjudge him?  What was there
about him to fear?

He read her thought.

"You don't see how that could be," he said sadly.  "I don't look that
way to you now.  But wait till you hear them talk.  You'll get
another view-point.  You won't see me this way at all any more.
You'll see me with their eyes----"

"_Don't!_" she said with a sob in her voice, putting up her hands as
if to defend herself from his words.

"I shall not blame you," he said lending tenderly, eagerly toward
her.  "It will not be your fault.  It will be almost inevitable.  You
belong with them and not with me, and you cannot help seeing me that
way when you get with them.  It is a part of my miserable folly.  It
is my punishment.  I have no right to make you think I am better than
they believe.  It will be easier for you to forget me if you believe
what they do----"

"I will never believe what they do!" said the girl vehemently, "I
will never listen to their opinion!  You may have sinned; you may
have done a lot of things that you ought not to have done--I am not
wise to judge those things--but you are _not bad_!  _I know_ you are
not!  And I know I can trust you!  I shall always trust you no matter
what anybody says, no matter how things look!  I _know_ you are good
and true!  _I know you!_"

She put out her hands piteously toward him and her delicate face was
lifted with determination and intensity.  There was something
glorious in the sparkle of her eyes.  He took her hands reverently.

"You _dear_!" he breathed tenderly.  "You wonderful woman!"

She caught her breath and her hands trembled in his, but she sat up
proudly as if she were defying the world in his defence.

"Now, tell me the rest," she said.  "Tell it _all_!  And then I shall
believe just what you tell me, nothing more!  If they tell me other
things I shall know they are false.  I shall not be afraid when you
tell me what you have done because you are here and I can look into
your eyes and know you are sorry; so tell me the worst.  But you
needn't ever think I shall listen to them."

So, with her soft small hands in his, and her eyes bright as the
stars above them, looking straight into his, he looked back as
straightforwardly and told her.  All the foolishness, the
stubbornness, and independence.  All the fight against convention and
law.  His gambling and wild, rough living.  His companioning with men
who were outlaws and sinners.  His revolutionary methods of dealing
with those who did not do as he thought they ought, or who tried to
interfere with him.  His summary punishment of those who stirred his
soul to wrath.  He told it in low tones and grave, searching out each
confession of his heart as though he would make a clean sweep of it,
and lifting his eyes bravely each time to meet the pain he could not
help seeing in hers.  It was his real judgment, his first sense of
shame and sorrow and repentance.

And then when it was told he bowed his head in silence for a moment,
still holding her hands, as though there yet remained something more
to say.  At last he spoke.

"There's one thing," he said, and he lifted his head with a sigh.
"Yes--two things, I might say--that I suppose you'll be glad to hear.
I haven't been a drinking man!  I doubt if many of your friends will
believe that, for I'm often in the saloons, and with men who drink.
I haven't noised it abroad that I don't drink, and only those who
have been with me a good deal and know my ways, understand it.  I
simply don't drink because I don't want to.  I saw what it did to men
when I first came out here.  I knew I needed my brains for what I
wanted to do, and I didn't like the idea of surrendering them for a
few hours' carouse and putting myself even temporarily out of my own
control, so I just determined I wouldn't drink and I didn't.  But
your brother and sister won't believe that.  My reputation is
understood to be of the worst, and drinking is a matter of course
when one is hard and wild as they think I am.  There's another thing,
too.  I've kept away from women.  Some of them hurt me too much when
I was a kid, and when I grew a little older, and so I decided against
them all.  That's kept me clean.  I can look you in the eyes and not
be ashamed.  I didn't do it because I had any idea there would ever
be one like you in my world.  I did it just because the kind of thing
that some men liked, turned me sick to think of.  This is probably
another thing your people wouldn't believe.  They've heard otherwise
of me.  They've shouldered every crime in the calendar on me.  And
perhaps they've had some reason from their standpoint.  I haven't
always tried to make things look right.  I didn't care.  It wasn't
their business.  There was a girl came to the Valley once with a
travelling show who was all in.  She was down on her luck and just
about ready to give up and take her own life.  I helped her out a
bit, paid for her at the hotel a few days till she got rested, and
sent her on her way to her father in Missouri; but you ought to have
heard the rumpus the town raised!  That added to my savory
reputation, you see.  Well, I'm no saint, but I've kept clean!
So--there you have the worst of me--and the best--but it's bad
enough.  Your father wouldn't stand for me a minute, and I guess he's
right.  I don't blame him.  I blame myself.  As for your sister!
Why, if Harrington knew I was out here alone with you he'd bring a
posse of men and shoot me on the spot for daring to bring you home.
He would.  He feels just that way about me."

"I shall change all that," said Jean with a thrill in her voice, "I
shall tell them how mistaken they have been in you.  I shall tell
them that was only a kind of rough outside that you wore--a mask that
hid your inner feelings.  I shall make them understand that they have
not known the real man you are at all."

"You cannot do that, little girl," said the man, gently leaning
toward her.  "It would be best for you not to try.  I tell you you do
not know in the least what the feeling is against me--

"But you will help to show them, too," said Jean, wide-eyed with
sorrow.  "You will not go on doing those things--those--well--the
things that made them feel you were not right----"  She paused in a
confusion of words, not liking to voice a thought against him.  "You
will not do so any more?"  She pleaded wistfully like a child.  "You
will make them see--for my sake if not for your own you will let them
see how wonderful you are!  How fine you have been to me!  You will
not let them go on thinking.  _You will change it all?_"

Her voice choked off in a sob and for a moment she dropped her
tear-wet face down upon his hands that held hers.  The strong man
thrilled and trembled with her touch and it was then he felt the most
crucial moment of his punishment.

He sat white and silent for a moment, longing to gather her into his
arms and comfort her, to crush her to him; but he would not.  The
nobleness in him held her sacred because he knew he was unworthy.
Then he spoke in a low, grave tone, and his voice had a hollow,
hopeless sound.

"I'll change, of course," he said.  "I couldn't do otherwise.  Did
you think I could go on that way after having known you?  I never
could do any of the things again that I know you wouldn't like.  I
couldn't, now that you've trusted me.  I wouldn't _want_ to.  You
have made everything seem different.  If it'll please you any I'll
promise anything you like.  But of course I know that doesn't matter
so far as our ever having each other is concerned.  Nothing I can do
can make people forget what they think I am.  They would never feel
differently.  They would feel it a disgrace for you to speak to me.
They'd always think you'd gone to perdition if you had anything to do
with me.  I'm not fit for you.  I know it and there's an end of it,
but I'll spend the rest of my life trying to make myself what I ought
to have been, if that will comfort you any."

The girl's hands clung now with almost a painful clasp, and tears
were dropping down her face.

"Don't!  _Don't!_" he pleaded earnestly.  "Don't take it so.  I'm not
worth it, really I'm not.  You'll find it out when you get to your
sister's and hear her talk, and--_forget_--about this"--his voice
broke and he lifted his face, white with sudden realization of what
that would mean to him.  "Oh, God!  What a fool I have been!"  The
words were wrung from the depths of his soul.

Then the girl spoke, her voice calm with a suddenly-acquired strength.

"Listen!" she said, and he wondered at her quietness.  "_I shall
never forget_.  _Never!_  Nothing that anybody can say will ever make
me think as they do of you.  I _know_ you--and you have saved my
life."

He stirred impatiently, and almost roughly tried to draw his hands
away.

"Don't talk of gratitude," he said huskily.

"No," she said firmly, taking his hands again and laying her own
within them as before.  Then he accepted them as if they were a
sacred trust, folding his reverently about them.

"I am not talking of gratitude," she said, and her voice was tense
with feeling.  "You saved my life and I know what you are, and what
you have done for me.  Nothing can ever change that, not even what
you have done in the past; and nobody can ever make me feel
differently about you.  I know you, I trust you--I--_love--you_!"
Her voice was low and sweet as she said this and she did not lift her
eyes.  The young man felt her fingers tremble within his own strong
grasp, and he looked down wonderingly at the slender wrists and
thrilled with holy awe at her words.  It humbled him, shamed him,
with a pain that was a solemn joy, to hear her.  And he had nothing
to say.  What gracious influence had been at work in his behalf that
miracle so great should have been wrought in a pure girl's heart for
him; an outlaw--a careless, selfish, wild man who had hitherto lived
as he pleased, for himself, caring for nobody, nobody caring for him.
He had held his head high and gone his independent way.  He had held
the creed that the whole world was against him, and his chief aim in
life should be to circumvent and annoy that world.  Nothing good and
holy had ever come into his life before.  Knowledge he had, and a
certain amount of worldly wisdom learned in a hard school, and well
learned; but love, care, tenderness, trust, had never been given to
him even in his babyhood.  No wonder he was confounded at the sudden
treasure thrust upon him.

"I am only a very young girl," Jean's voice went on.  "I know you are
right that I must not do anything to distress my father and mother.
They love me very much and I love them.  You and I can go our
separate ways if we must, but nobody can hinder me from trusting you.
It is right I should.  I owe it to you for what you have done for
me--and my love I could not help giving you.  I know you are going to
be right and true forever; I know you will not do those things any
more that have made people think you were not good--I know you will
always be just what I think you are now, won't you?"

His voice was low and solemn, and his eyes held depths of sincerity
as he lifted them to her pleading ones and answered:

"I promise you."

"And I promise you that I will trust you always," she said, and thus
their covenant was made.

For a long moment they sat with clasping hands, unaware of the beauty
of the evening, aware only of their own two startled, suffering
spirits, that had found and lost each other and learned the
consequences of sin.  They did not seem to need words, for each knew
what was in the other's heart.

He raised her at last to her feet and, bending low, whispered:

"I thank you."

He stood a moment hesitating, then gave her hands one quick pressure
again and turned away.

"I was going to ask something," he said, "but I guess that isn't
square."

And she stood pondering what it might have been.

Silently he helped her on the pony and without words they rode away
into the moonlight.

There were tears in the girl's eyes when she lifted them at last and
asked:

"And won't I see you at all?  Won't you ever come to the house?"

There was a sound almost of tears in the man's voice as he answered:

"I am afraid not."

After that they talked softly in tones that people use when they are
about to go apart on a long journey and may not ever meet again.
Monosyllables, half-finished sentences, of which each knew the
beginning or the ending without the words.  Large understanding,
quick pain, wistfulness, longing, a question now and then--this was
their conversation.

They came at last to the brow of a hill where below them at a gentle
slope Hawk Valley lay, its lights twinkling among the velvety shadows
of the night.  In the clear moonlight it seemed so near, so sudden,
as it lay just below them that Jean caught her breath in a cry that
was almost a sob.  She knew without being told that the parting of
their ways had come.  By common consent they checked their horses and
made them stand side by side.  Holt put out his hand and laid it on
hers.

"Don't!" he said huskily.  "I won't disappoint you.  No matter what
anybody tells you, always remember that.  I won't disappoint you!
You needn't think I've forgotten or changed.  I don't forget the only
good thing that ever came into my life.  _You can trust me!_"

"I know," she replied softly.  "I know I can trust you.  And I've
been thinking.  There's no reason why you couldn't come to see me.  I
don't care what anybody thinks.  You saved my life!  I'm not ashamed
of you.  I have the right to ask you to call and to receive you.  My
father would approve of that, I am sure."

"You're wonderful!" he exclaimed intensely.  "You're not like any
other girl I ever saw.  But, it wouldn't do.  Your father might stand
for it, but your brother-in-law never would.  He hates me like
poison, not so much because of my reputation as because I've stood in
the way of some of his plans.  He would kick me out like a dog if I
darkened his doors.  You'll understand when you hear them talk.  It
would be just as well if you didn't say anything about me.  It won't
be necessary for them to know who brought you home; just say a man
who was on the train----"

Jean straightened up in her saddle and grasped his hand.

"Indeed I shall tell them who brought me out of death, and just what
I think of him.  They shall know all that you have done for me.  Do
you think I would keep still about it?  I couldn't.  It would be
disloyalty.  It would be cowardly!"

He watched her kindling face and flashing eyes in the moonlight and
hungrily stored the picture away in his memory.

"Darling!" he breathed reverently, as if the words were drawn from
his lips in spite of all resolution.  Then, raising his voice a
trifle, and lifting his head to the night sky:

"I never knew a girl could be like this!  What a fool I have been!"
The words ended almost in a groan, and for answer the girl drew
nearer to him and laid her other hand gently upon his.

Lights flashed below them in the village and voices rose; a coarse
laugh rang out and a child's cry; some people talked in an open
doorway in another place and called good-night.  Then a door slammed
and other lights twinkled: just the commonplace noises of life
jarring in to break a moment of tremendous import in the lives of
these two.  The time had come to go down to their valley and they
knew it.  With one lingering hand-clasp they started on down to the
village.

Holt selected the shadowed ways and quieter approach to the
Harrington home, and the two rode silently until they came to the
house.




CHAPTER VIII

Holt checked the horses and, dismounting, stood beside Jean in the
shadow of a great tree by the roadside.  Within ten feet of them the
light from a wide window streamed out upon the grass in front of a
pleasant house built in bungalow style, with broad porches and
vine-clad approaches.  Hammocks and easy rockers were dimly visible,
with a brighter hint of glow and warmth inside the swaying curtains
of the window where a piano was sounding pleasantly, and a man and
woman were sitting on either side of a table under a prettily shaded
reading lamp.  A boy's voice called down the stairs and the little
girl at the piano stopped playing and answered him; then tinkled on
with her music.

All this the two under the tree saw and heard without sensing it.
They were looking into one another's eyes in the semi-darkness,
realizing that across that streak of light was separation for them,
perhaps forever; and that probably this instant here and now was all
that was left to them together out of the eternity of the future
years.

Jean put her hands timidly on Holt's shoulders.  "I've been thinking
what it was you wanted to ask of me," she said so softly that if one
had been passing it would have seemed but the breathing of the
evening air.  She waited and Holt looked at her wistfully.

"I have no right," he said.  "It wouldn't be square."

The girl's eyes looked steadily, shyly into his, though in the shadow
they could see more with the spirit than with the material vision.

"Was it----" she stopped, her heart beating fast.  "Was it--this?"

She leaned forward and kissed him softly on the forehead just where
the soft curls waved away; and her lips were like a benediction, that
seemed to bring forgiveness and a purging away of the past.

With bowed head as at a sacrament he stood, then softly said:

"You have understood, and I thank you.  I had no right to ask, but I
can never forget or be false to that."

He stooped and laid his lips reverently on her hands; then lifted her
down quickly as if he could not bear to make the sorrow of the
parting longer; and together they went forward across the patch of
light, up the path and the wide low steps to the porch.

Holt knocked once on the door, not loudly, but there was in the sound
a menace that made Jean shudder as she heard it.  She reached out her
hand to his as if she would take shelter there from something that
was coming, that she could not quite understand.  Holt pressed her
fingers quickly, tightly in a clasp that almost hurt her, and then
dropping her hand, stepped back into the shadow of the vines as the
tinkling piano stopped.  There was a sound of footsteps coming to the
door, and of voices in expectation.

The door was flung wide and in the stream of light Mr. and Mrs.
Harrington stood looking eagerly out into the darkness, with a little
girl of twelve in a white dress, peering shyly but curiously around
her mother and a boy of five struggling to get into the centre of the
family group.  Jean stood alone in the light on the porch, with Holt
in the shadow at her side.

"I have brought Miss Grayson," said Holt in a grave, almost
challenging tone, from his dark position just outside the stream of
light.

But the people in the doorway whose eyes had come from the lighted
room saw only the figure of the girl standing in the brightness.

"Oh, Jean!  My little sister!  You have come at last!" cried Mrs.
Harrington, rushing forward to clasp her in her arms, and draw her
inside the door; and in the confusion of the greetings the girl's
escort was quite forgotten for the moment.

Within the doorway at last they looked about for him and found no one.

"Why, who came with you, child?  Where has he gone?" asked her
brother-in-law solicitously.  "We must ask him in and hear all about
your adventures."  He stepped out on the porch and looked down the
path in the moonlight, but saw no one anywhere.

"Yes, please ask him in," pleaded Jean, her face illumined with
eagerness, "he has been so wonderful!  He saved my life.  If it
hadn't been for him I shouldn't have been here."  And she hurried to
the door and peered out into the darkness.

"Of course," said her sister, going to the door to look.  "How
thoughtless of us not to have welcomed him at once, but we were so
overwhelmed to have you at last, after all the anxiety--you can't
think how terrible it has been.  Which way could he have gone?
James, look down the road either way.  He can't be far away.  What
was his name, Jean?  Can't you call after him?"

"He must be over there."  Jean pointed toward the great tree where
the horses had stood but a short moment before.  "We dismounted just
under that tree.  He can't have gone far with two horses--so
soon----" and she hurried across the grass to the tree, but there was
no sign of horse or man in the deep shadow or the serene moonlight
anywhere.

"Call, James!" commanded Mrs. Harrington, and her husband obeyed, but
no answering call came back, save the echoes of his voice.

"What did you say his name was, Jean?" asked the puzzled householder
walking slowly back to the steps.  "It seems very strange he could
get away so soon.  Where was he going?  Did he live near here?  We
ought to put him up for the night, of course.  It's most mortifying
to have him disappear in this manner when he has been so good to you.
He must have gone to find rest and food for his horses and himself.
I'll send the servant out to look him up.  He'll surely find him.
What did he look like?  What did you say was his name?"

Jean, slowly climbing the steps to the porch, and comprehending that
Holt's disappearance had been intentional, answered in a strange low
voice that tried to be natural:

"Holt, his name was Holt, Jasper Holt----" her voice lingered on the
words as if she would glorify the man by merely speaking his name,
and elevate him in their eyes to the place he occupied in her heart.

"Holt!" exclaimed her brother-in-law.  "Holt!  Not Jasper Holt!
Impossible!  There must be some mistake."

"It couldn't have been Jasper Holt, of course," said his wife quite
decidedly.  "He isn't capable of saving anybody's life, much less a
relative of ours, Jean dear.  It _must_ have been some one else.  Are
you sure about the name?"

"Quite sure!" said Jean composedly, though she felt her whole frame
trembling.

"Perhaps it was his father," suggested Eleanor, looking at her
husband.  "Have you ever heard that Jasper Holt had a father living,
James?  How old a man was he, Jean?"

"He was a young man, Eleanor, tall and handsome, and very brave and
strong."  Jean's eyes were lifted to meet her sister's smiling doubt,
and her chin was raised with an attitude of defiance.

"Listen, Eleanor, he was wonderful.  I dropped from the window of the
burning sleeper into a river, and something struck me on the head
when I rose and tried to swim."

"You poor, dear little girl!" interpolated Eleanor, reaching out
yearning arms to clasp her sister again, but Jean held her gently
back and went on with her eager tale.

"He caught me and dragged me along, helping me as far as I could go,
and when I couldn't swim any longer he brought me a long distance
himself to land, and carried me a great ways through the woods.  He
built a fire, dried his own coat, and put it over me while I slept.
He took care of me just as my own father might have done; found food,
water, and a house where we slept the first night; and where we got
horses.  He has been splendid to me all day."

"Well, he can't be our Jasper Holt, dearie--it's impossible.  He
isn't a bit like that----"

"Yes," said Jean, looking earnestly, bravely at her sister.  "Yes,
Eleanor, it is your Jasper Holt.  He told me you did not like him,
but I'm sure you don't know what he really is--or you couldn't, you
_couldn't_ possibly think ill of him.  Oh, Eleanor!----" and suddenly
Jean's courage gave way in a flood of tears and she threw herself in
her sister's arms.

"You poor, dear little girl!  You are all worn out and we are letting
you stand here and talk when you ought to be in bed this minute,"
exclaimed her sister, folding her in loving arms.  "Never mind now,
dear, you just forget it till to-morrow.  It was an awful experience
for you to go through all alone with a strange man, and you need a
lot of rest before you can tell us about it.  Come now, James will
send the man out to hunt for your escort and you needn't worry any
more.  We shall find out there is some mistake, I'm sure the Jasper
Holt we know would never turn out of his way to save anybody's
life--he'd much rather kill someone--unless he had some evil purpose
in it.  It's possibly someone who has used his name for fun or
something.  Come now, Jean dear, take off your hat.  Why, child,
where did you get this ridiculous rig you have on?  It's good it
wasn't daylight when you arrived.  It was thoughtful of your escort
to bring you in the dark.  Your trunk arrived yesterday.  Come up to
your room and wash while I have your supper put on the table.  I've
kept it nice and hot for I knew you would be hungry."

Jean suddenly lifted up her head and wiped the tears away.

"I'd like to tell you just a little first, if you please," she said.
"It's no use whatever for you to send out to find Mr. Holt.  He will
not come back, I am sure.  I suppose he meant to slip away.  He told
me before he got here that you would not want him.  He did not want
me to mention him at all, but I had to tell you how fine he has been."

Mrs. Harrington and her husband stood looking at one another aghast;
while Jean, her hair dishevelled, her sweet face glowing with
eagerness, sketched most briefly but forcibly the peril through which
she had come and the faithfulness and care of her protector.  More
than one glance of incredulity passed between husband and wife as the
girl went on with her story; and yet, as she came to her final
sentences, they perceived that her protector and savior must have
been the Jasper Holt they knew and despised.

"I guess it was Holt all right!" said Harrington, with an ominous
frown, "and he did well to disappear like the coward that he is.  He
knew he was not wanted around here!"

"Coward?" exclaimed Jean, "coward!  Jasper Holt is no coward!  You do
not know him!"  Her eyes were flashing fire; her whole slender body
tense with indignation.

Eleanor looked alarmedly at her husband, but tried to smile
pacifically at her sister.  "Never mind to-night, dear," she said
soothingly, "he's evidently appeared to you as an angel of light.  He
is handsome, I must admit--in a kind of a dashing, dreadful way--and
of course any one who saved you and was kind to you would be under a
kind of glamour just now.  I'm sure we're grateful to him for not
letting you drown.  It's quite the unexpected; but really, when it
comes to bringing you home, you're quite attractive, you know; and
I've no doubt he thought it would be pleasant to have a little
flirtation with a pretty girl.  Besides, I think he rather enjoyed
putting James under an obligation to him.  I'm sure I hope he will
know enough not to presume upon this for further acquaintance.  He
has been most unpleasant, not to say criminal, in a business
way,--but never mind now, Jean, we'll talk about it more tomorrow.
Wait until you hear what everybody says about him and then you will
see we are not prejudiced.  We don't blame you for being grateful.
Be as grateful as you like--but _don't have anything more to do with
him_!  Come now, this is the way to your room.  Let me help you
unfasten this ridiculous frock.  Where did you say you got it?  I
know you never had this in your wardrobe when you started from home
and mother----"

Mrs. Harrington chattered on, giving the girl time to recover her
calmness, for she saw that she was terribly excited; and Jean choked
back the hot tears that welled to her eyes, and the words of protest
against the injustice to Holt, and went about her toilet.

In a few minutes more she had made a hasty toilet and, attired in one
of her own cool little muslins, she was seated in the dining-room
with an admiring audience about her asking questions about home, the
journey and the cousins she had visited on the way.  The children
hung about her eagerly, patting her shyly, and watching her every
move with shining eyes.  Almost, for a few minutes, the girl forgot
the perils through which she had passed, and the lover of whom she
must not speak.

When supper was finished the children were sent to bed, and Jean
suddenly remembered the leather case she had been charged to convey
to her brother-in-law.

"Oh, James," she said, "I've a package for you; 'very important
papers' the queer old man who gave it to me said they were.  He was
going to get off at the next station, he said--he had been
telegraphed for, or something--and he heard me tell the conductor
that you had telegraphed for a berth for me, so he asked if I would
give you these papers at once.  If he knows about the accident, he's
worrying about his precious bundle by this time, I suspect.  Wait,
I'll get it.  It's upstairs in my bag."

Jean hurried up to her room and had a little difficulty in finding
the bag which she finally discovered under a trunk tray.  The sight
of the little wax paper cups and her own little damp wad of a
handkerchief she and Holt had both used for a towel that afternoon
when they washed their hands at a spring, struck a pang to her heart.
The dampness and stuffed condition of the bag made it difficult to
get the bundle out, and giving it an impatient jerk she turned the
whole thing upside down on the little table that stood by the
bedside.  The bundle rolled to the floor, opening as it fell, for the
edges of the leather case had loosened with the wetting they had
received, and let out the papers that it held.  Jean stooped wearily
and gathered them up with a gingerly touch, remembering the uncouth
old man who had given it to her, and was rather surprised that the
papers themselves looked clean and were evenly folded.  She hurried
down to the bright living-room, holding them out to Mr. Harrington,
and was startled at the look on his face as he saw what she gave him.

"You needn't be afraid, it's not a ghost," she laughed as she put the
damp package in his hand.  "It's rather dilapidated, but it's all
there.  I did the best I could with it, but it was submerged for a
long time, and I had no opportunity to dry it."

Harrington said nothing, but his face turned suddenly white and his
hand shook as he turned back the limp leather and looked at the
folded papers inside.  She saw by his expression that he knew what it
was.

"Are they so very important?" she asked.

"Pretty important," he said briefly, opening the papers one at a time
and half turning away from her as if he did not wish her to see them.

"I'm glad I saved them, then," she said fervently.  "I came near
throwing them away when I dropped out of that window.  The old man
was so dirty I couldn't bear to have anything he had handled.  Well,
good-night."

She turned away, feeling that he wished to be alone with the papers,
but he looked up and called her back.

"Wait, Jean.  What kind of a looking man was it who gave them to you?"

She told him in detail.

"Did you let anyone see this case?" he asked sharply.

"No," said Jean, and then remembered.  "Well, not exactly.  It fell
out of my bag once and the paper I had wrapped it in fell off, but
there was no one by but Mr. Holt and he didn't notice it in the
least."

"Are you sure?" questioned her brother, his face white, his
expression growing tense with anxiety.  "How near was he?"

"He was standing close by, not three feet away, and he stooped and
picked up the case and handed it back to me without saying a word,"
said Jean, a hint almost of indignation in her tone that warned her
brother he had gone far enough in his inquiries.

"Well, never mind," he said, turning away.  "It's all right, of
course.  They are very important; papers relating to some business my
company is carrying on, and Holt has been making a good deal of
trouble for us.  I would rather he didn't know about them."

Jean was vexed, she scarcely knew why, and stood for an instant
hesitating.  Should she say more or go immediately upstairs?  It was
very strange for James to act that way, as if it were her fault.  And
it was most unreasonable and unjust for him to feel that way about
Jasper Holt.  Her soul revolted against it.

Harrington looked up, annoyed, as if he would be rid of the girl; and
then, realizing the look of wonder on her face, he tried to control
his expression and smile.

"Well, good-night, Jean.  Don't let this trouble you.  I'm deeply
grateful that you were so faithful as to guard the papers through all
your experiences.  Rest well and don't think any more about it."

So dismissed, the girl turned slowly and mounted the stairs, but as
she glanced back she saw him fluttering the papers over as if he were
counting them two or three times.  As she reached the landing she
heard him summon a servant and send him in hot haste for someone
named "Garrett."

"Tell him he must come at once, it is important, urgent business,"
was the message sent.  Then she closed her door and went about her
preparations for the night, but her mind was strangely disturbed.




CHAPTER IX

Eleanor Harrington came presently to the door and tapped.

"You're not asleep yet, are you, Jean?" she called.  "James just
wanted me to ask if there was any possibility that some of those
papers were lost on the way?  Did they fall or did anything happen
where one might have slipped out?  He thinks that two most important
ones are missing."

"Not while they were in my possession, Eleanor," said Jean
positively, feeling a return of her annoyance at her brother's
manner.  She opened the door and stood framed in the doorway, looking
adorable in her little, pale blue kimono, with her hair tumbling
about her shoulders.  The elder sister fell on her neck and kissed
her affectionately.

"You poor little girl, how tired you look.  Get to bed quickly.  It
was a shame to trouble you any more about those horrid papers.
There, good-night, dear!  This is positively my last appearance," and
she closed the door and went downstairs.

Five minutes later Jean turned to put out the light and saw, lying on
the floor on the farther side of the little bed-stand, a slip of
paper folded once across, and about the size of the wallet which she
had given her brother-in-law.  She pounced upon it and took it nearer
the light.  It looked more like an old letter that might have slipped
from her trunk tray than a business paper.

As she opened the paper the name of Jasper Holt caught her eye, and
her interest was at once enlisted.  How came a paper bearing that
name in the guest chamber of her brother's house?  It could not
possibly have come through her.  Nothing of his could have caught in
her garments, there was no place for anything to catch, and no way
that his possessions could get into her bag.  It could not, of
course, be the missing paper from the wallet, since it bore his hated
name.  Yet, her brother had spoken of disagreeable business
relations.  Would this paper, perhaps, by any chance, explain to her
the animosity that had sprung up between the two men?  She felt she
had the right to know.  She glanced quickly down the page.

It was a simple contract, the grant of certain water rights to Jasper
Holt in consideration of payment received, and to the veriest child
who could read at all it would be patent that the paper must be the
private property of Jasper Holt himself.  How came it here in the
house of his enemy?

She read the few lines over many times, until she knew them
thoroughly; and slowly there grew in her heart a conviction that
something was wrong somewhere.  Her first impulse, to call her sister
and consult her, she could not bring herself to follow.  It seemed,
somehow, that here was something she must think out for herself.

However and whatever her brother and sister felt, _she_ owed a
loyalty to Jasper Holt.  She might not do a wrong, even
inadvertently, to him who had saved her life and cared for her so
tenderly.  If he were here she would unquestioningly have put the
paper into his hands and asked him what to do about it.  She had
promised to trust him, and she felt such great confidence in him,
from what she already knew about him, that she was convinced he would
send the paper back to Harrington if it belonged to the latter.

But Holt was not here, and the problem of the future was still
shrouded in difficulty.  Would she ever see him to consult?  Was
this, perhaps, one of the missing papers James wanted, and why did
she not trust James to give it back to Holt as quickly as she would
have trusted Holt to give it to James?  The question brought a look
of trouble to her brow, and a flush to her cheek.  Did she distrust
her brother-in-law just a little bit?  Had she always done so without
knowing it?  Or was it just a prejudice because he seemed not quite
so fine in his nature as her beloved sister?  Besides, James was
prejudiced against Holt.  It might be hard for him to be generous and
true under those circumstances.  Yet her heart rebuked her for the
thought.

She stood uncertainly holding the bit of paper for a long time and
finally put out the light and went and sat by the open window, trying
to clear her mental vision and understand what she ought to do.

Out on the lawn the shadows were dark under the great tree where she
and Jasper Holt had said good-bye.  She thrilled again as she
remembered.

The stars were clear and friendly as though they, too, remembered.
The long stream of light still marked the divide between the shadows
and the path to the house, for the lamps were burning brightly
downstairs, though all seemed quiet.  Jean had heard Eleanor come
upstairs again, and tiptoe softly by her door as if fearing to wake
her.  She felt almost guilty, sitting there in the dark awake.

The pillows were soft in the great willow, cushioned chair she
occupied, and the air was sweet that came in from the plains and
sifted through the lacy shadow-work of vines.  The day had been long
and full of excitement, and the kindly night wrapped softly about the
young sweet thing sitting with an angel's problem to decide.  With
the paper still held tightly in her hand, her head drooped back
against the chair and she was asleep.

It might have been an hour later that she awoke, the gruff voice of a
man startling her into consciousness once more:

"That you, Jim?  What's the matter?  It's fierce when one's having
the time of his life to have to turn and run at a moment's call.
What's up?  Something pretty stiff or you never would have sent that
message.  If I find it's any nonsense and squeamishness I'll----"

"Sh----"

The voice suddenly changed into a gruff whisper.  Jean was
sufficiently awake to realize that the man Harrington had sent for
was come.  Then she addressed herself to her problem again, and the
voices in low mumble, gradually rising to distinguishable sentences
now and then, continued under her window.

She was not conscious of hearing them until suddenly she was startled
into sharp attention by a name.

"I tell you if Jasper Holt gets onto this in time it will mean
State's prison at least for us.  It looks bad."  It was Harrington's
voice that spoke.

"I don't see it that way," said the stranger.  "Holt hasn't got onto
it, and Holt won't get onto it.  You say the girl said he handed her
back the wallet and never said a word.  Don't you know Holt would
never have let his own valuable private papers out of his hand if he
had suspected in the least that he held them?  You know Holt better
than that.  Ten to one he was so taken with the girl that he never
noticed the wallet; and why would he think she had his wallet,
anyway?  I think it was pretty rare of old man Scathlin to think of
giving the papers to her.  It threw Holt entirely off the track for
good.  Now, what we want to do is to get hold of Blount.  He's the
whole show up there in New York, anyway.  I'll just wire him to come
on at once and talk it over, and we'll get to work and cut off the
water supply while little Jasper's training his roses and wondering
what has become of his perfectly good deeds to his perfectly good
silver mine."

"But one of the missing papers is the grant of water rights.  If that
were here we might talk----"

Jean sat up suddenly with bated breath, and her arm hit against the
hairbrush which, in her excitement of preparing for bed, she had laid
down upon the window sill.  The hairbrush fell with a sharp noise on
the polished floor just over the edge of the rug, and the two men in
the vine-draped porch below started fiercely and looked up, the
stranger with an oath.

"What's that?"

"Oh, nothing, I guess," said Harrington, his own voice a trifle
strained.  "Probably my wife has gone in to tuck up the baby and
dropped something----  Oh, you needn't worry, my sister-in-law is
fast asleep hours ago.  Her light went out just after I came out here
to watch for you, and there hasn't been a sound overhead since.  She
was worn to a frazzle."

"Where is her room.  This window up here?"

"No, just next, but she's asleep, I'm sure."

Harrington rose and stepping off the porch, walked out on the lawn in
the edge of shadow next the path and looked up.  Jean, huddled back
against her great window-chair, her face white with excitement, could
see his attitude as he surveyed the windows and then reassured came
back to the porch.

"It's all right," he said in a low tone, "but maybe we had better go
to the other end of the porch.  I was afraid of waking the baby over
there, and the rascal is a difficult problem when he wakes in the
night."

"Well, talk lower anyway," said the stranger.  "What did you say the
other missing paper was?  You have the list of them all, haven't you?"

"Yes, copies.  I wish we'd sent the copies instead of the originals,
only Scathlin's story about finding them wouldn't have worked then.
The other lost paper is the claim, with the location of the ore--most
important.  Strange that those two, the ones on which the others all
hinge, are gone!  I can't understand.  Do you suppose Scathlin has
something up his sleeve?  Maybe he kept only those two and means to
get these later--but what object could he have had?"

There was silence for a moment while the two men thought.

At last Garrett spoke:

"What do you suppose Holt was doing on that train--the same train
with Scathlin?  Holt didn't leave home till Scathlin had been on his
way nearly two days.  When was the last we heard from Scathlin?"

"Pittsburgh.  A telegram.  He'd just arrived," answered Harrington
glumly.

"What day was that?  Could Holt have reached Pittsburgh before
Scathlin got away?  He's sharp you know.  Have you got the telegram?"

"It's inside," said Harrington.  "Just step in."  And the two men
went into the house.  Jean could hear their low, troubled voices,
rumbling on, but she could not hear any more words, and she sat
shivering over what she had heard.

Scathlin!  Scathlin!  Why was that word so familiar?  Scathlin!  Ah!
She had heard it from the lips of Holt himself, before she went into
the sleeper.  It was what he had called the old man.

Was this wrong, this involuntary eavesdropping?  She had not meant to
listen, had never thought there might be anything said that she would
understand, or that they would care if she did hear, until the whole
revelation was in her possession; and then she was too much
frightened to stir or think what she ought to do.  Was it not right,
perhaps, that she should have heard; and, yet, what could she do?  It
was all too evident that Jasper Holt was about to be cheated in some
way.  That remark about his private papers was unmistakable.  And the
little paper in her hand that had to do with water rights was his
also.  Water rights were sacred things in the west, and most
important.  The losing of them had often been the cause of the
sweeping away of whole fortunes she knew; and the little bit of paper
that proved his right was in her trembling hand to bestow where she
would!  It was plain that if she should go down now and give it to
those two men she would be most welcome; but she was sure that it
would not be right for them to have it.  They had admitted enough to
make her feel that there was some plot against Holt; and suddenly all
her latent dislike of her brother-in-law, which had been lying
dormant through the years because there was nothing to rouse it,
sprang into being.  Her decision was made.  She must somehow get that
paper to Jasper Holt, and that just as soon as possible.  She must
not let her brother know that she had it.  If she were mistaken about
this, Jasper Holt would be true and tell her so and return the paper.
She felt as sure of him as if she had known him all her life.  But
there _could_ be no mistake.  It _must_ be his.  The men had
practically owned it!

It made her shiver with cold to think how dreadful all this was.
Brought up to strictest integrity, it seemed terrible that one in
their own family should swerve from it; there must be some other
explanation to the talk she had heard.  Things in the business world
were queer, and a lot of shady things were done under the name of
righteousness.  She had heard her father talk about "graft"; maybe it
was something like that.  Maybe James thought he was doing good
service to cut Jasper Holt out of his water right somehow; and maybe,
in some strange unexplainable way, he was justified.  And yet--what
did they mean about the location of the silver mine?  Oh, it was too
much for her!  If she had never known and loved Jasper Holt, and
trusted him, she would have gone down and put the whole thing in
James's hands and gone to bed thinking nothing further about it.  But
now her whole soul was roused to do the right thing toward her lover,
who, she saw, was under the ban, and who seemed to her to be in the
right in this case at least.

It occurred to her how easily she might wash her hands of the whole
matter by dropping that bit of paper out of her window and letting it
be found or not; as the case might be.  How easy to live sometimes if
one had no conscience to reckon with--and no heart!

It seemed a long time that she sat trembling by the open window,
afraid to stir lest the men downstairs should hear her move; unable
to think connectedly and decide what she ought to do.  But at last
the two men came out on the piazza, again, the guest apparently about
to take his leave.  His voice had lost its easy assurance.

"It looks bad!" he said, "very bad!  It looks as if Scathlin had
bungled things.  If Holt suspects we have anything to do with it,
why, our fish is dished.  I guess there's nothing else to do but send
him back those papers, saying that a stranger put them into your
sister's hands to bring to you, and you know nothing about them, but
seeing his name among them you suppose they must be his.  You could
add a word about being grateful for his care of the girl or something
of the sort to make it look natural."

"But that throws all the responsibility on me," said Harrington
angrily.  "And it looks mighty funny to have those two important
papers gone.  These are no use to anybody without those----"

"Of course, but you're not supposed to know that, and he can't do
anything but bluster.  Anyhow, as far as I see, it's your only
chance, and you'll have to do it mighty quick or that won't do any
good.  I wouldn't keep them a day----"

"I shall do nothing of the kind," snarled Harrington.  "I would
rather destroy them than play into his hand that way.  I'm not in a
position to throw suspicion on myself in that style."

"Do as you please," said the guest scornfully.  "That's my advice.  I
wash my hands of it.  If you want to hang on to a lost cause for the
sake of pride you'll have to do it without me.  I know when to quit."

"But suppose Scathlin returns in a few days with Blount."

"Scathlin won't return with Blount.  You can take my word for that.
Either Scathlin's dead or he's sold those other two papers to Holt
and given away our secrets into the bargain.  You may depend on it,
if Scathlin was all right he'd have telegraphed at intervals as he
was ordered.  There's some reason why he quit telegraphing at
Pittsburgh."

Garrett departed noisily, and after a few minutes pacing up and down
the piazza Harrington went in, put out the lights and went upstairs.

Jean crept softly into bed, still grasping the paper close to her
breast; and weary, troubled, bewildered, she soon fell fast asleep.

Later, when the moon had died and only the luminous mist in the East
proclaimed the dawn at hand, a rider came quietly down the road, his
horse stepping as if with padded feet, and stopped before the house.

The rider dismounted silently in the darkness and with noiseless
tread came and laid something down in the dewy silence at the door.
Then mounted and slipped away into the darkness again.




CHAPTER X

Down the long silent road beyond the sleeping town the rider passed,
out to the plains.  His horse knew the trail well, was rested and
glad to be used.  He stepped away into the gray dawning carrying his
beloved master with willing feet.  There was no need to hurry him.
He seemed to know as if by instinct just how fast to travel to arrive
at the Junction in time for the early morning train.  It was not the
first time he had journeyed thus at that hour.

The rider sat his horse as one who had entered upon a long quest
which may not end this side the other world.  There was weariness in
his attitude, and profound thoughtfulness, with steady determination
to pursue his way to the end.

Now and then he bent his head and laid his lips on the cool fragrance
of a great, dim bud stuck carelessly into his buttonhole, its branch
and thorns and leaves still attached as if it might have been plucked
from the vine by hasty impulse.  Later, when the day came up and
houses were in sight, he tore it from its stem and wrapped it quickly
in his handkerchief to hide away in his pocket.

The stars were paling when he started.  They slipped one by one
silently into the oblivion of a background of light as he rode, but
before they left him they spoke many things to his sad, determined
soul.  Sometimes it almost seemed to him that a girl rode at his side
and understood his thoughts.

His thoughts were as one would go with lighted lamp and eyes suddenly
awake to see, through the long unvisited chambers of his soul, and
find with startled senses the dirt and cobwebs and musty, dusty
corners, cluttered with moth-eaten garments of a dead past; and,
searching closer in dark crannies, find the bones of dead things that
should have lived but for the unwatchful keeper of that house.

The young face lost its boyishness and grew grave and haggard with
suffering.  Then he laid his lips on the cool flower petals and heard
again the voice of the girl like music in his soul: "I will trust you
always, no matter what anybody says!" and it thrilled him and gave
him courage, so that when morning burst upon the plain and he came in
sight of the straggling houses surrounding the Junction, he lifted up
his face to the golden morning sky and breathed aloud solemnly the
words:

"Oh God!  Help me to keep my vow to her, always, even to the end of
life!  Help me to be what she believes me to be!  Help me to be
worthy of her trust!"

With these words upon his lips and the memory of her kiss upon his
brow he went forward into the new day and the new life that was
before him.  This duty that was his to-day was by no means a pleasant
one, and it might be long and hard, but he must do it in a different
way from that which he would have done it three days before, for
to-day he was a different creature.  He had seen himself as he was
before God, and henceforth all things were become new.

He was in time to make all his arrangements to leave the horse before
the train arrived.  He had chosen to travel across country to the
Junction rather than to take the train at his home station, partly to
avoid publicity, and partly to save time, for there was no train from
Hawk Valley early enough to connect with this Eastern Express which
stopped at the Junction.  Passengers from Hawk Valley wishing to
catch this train would be forced to leave the evening before and put
up at the Junction tavern, a most unpleasant experience for any
traveller.  Jasper Holt preferred travelling on horseback at all
times to riding on the railroad, and besides, every minute counted
now in the errand he was on his way to perform.

All the morning while the train glided over the level plain he was
going over his recent experience; going back to the moment when the
girl entered upon his vision and looked at him with that clear,
direct gaze that trusted him; thinking over every detail of his
finding her in the darkness and peril; the miracle that he and not
some other should have found and saved her; recalling every incident
of the beautiful, wearisome way by which they had gone home together;
and the wonder of the girl's faith in him, her love for him--his love
for her.

Any one watching the absorbed, silent man sitting alone, his head
dropped back against the seat, his hat drawn down over his eyes, the
lines of gravity deep upon brow and lip and chin, would have judged
him for a much older man than he was, so maturing had life thus far
been to him.

And now, the task that was before him was to find Scathlin--if,
indeed, he were still in the land of the living--or some evidence
that he was dead; and to know beyond a question of doubt what had
become of those papers, and just how far Harrington had been
responsible for the theft.

He loathed his task, yet felt compelled by some inner urging to
finish it.  Almost his soul revolted to the extent of giving up the
case and letting his enemies triumph over him.  What to him now was
his silver mine, since he had found her--and lost her forever?  Why
not let his property go and leave Hawk Valley forever, where his
reputation had undone him in his greatest opportunity?  Why not go to
some new land where he was unknown and begin all over again?

But his soul was too strong and true for that.  He must face his
mistakes in the place where he had made them and undo, if might be,
some of the harm he had done.  He had to do this whether he would or
no.  It was right that he should find his papers and make good his
claim.  It was a part of the true living he had set himself from this
time forth.  He had promised to let people see that he was
trustworthy and this was the first step.  If Harrington and his men
got their way he would be branded as a thief and a liar again and the
old reputation only fixed the firmer.

It was toward evening when they passed the scene of the late disaster
and the long rays of the sun rested over the river and valley where
peril and death had brooded.  A temporary way had been made for the
tracks, all signs of death and disaster swept hastily out of sight by
the wrecking train, and the tide of travel was already rolling calmly
on again.  A swarm of workmen, like ants carrying grains of sand over
a wall, were at work on the broken bridge, and the passing traveller
looked cheerfully across and got no hint of fire and fear and sudden
death.  Even the trainmen had had their orders and answered gruffly,
in brief sentences, when questioned about the wreck, turning it off
lightly as a small thing, until they heard that here was one of the
almost victims of the accident.  Then they looked sharply a second
time and stole back to talk in low tones with guarded sentences about
where the blame should lie.  But no one knew much about the details,
after all.  The conductor reluctantly admitted that the victims,
those who had been saved, had been taken to the nearest city and
distributed among the hospitals.  That was all.  He implied that
there were many victims who had not even that comfort.

So, on to the nearest city went Jasper Holt, arriving shortly after
sundown, and began his search among the hospitals at once, after
having visited the railroad office and got all the information they
could give him.

Three days and two nights Jasper Holt searched, in hospitals and
morgue, and even private homes.  Wherever he could learn of a person
who had been through the accident he went to see if they knew any
clue to the man he sought, but not a hint did he find.

It was entirely reasonable to suppose that Scathlin had lost his life
in the fire or the river, and to feel that further search was
unnecessary.  But Jasper Holt, standing at the window of his hotel
room and looking out on the busy streets of that Western city toward
evening of the third day, could not feel it so.  More and more it
became necessary to find that man, or be sure of his death.  The
three days of visiting hospitals and viewing suffering and death had
graven the sad lines even deeper in his fine, strong face.  It began
to seem now to him that he might even have a duty toward that
loathsome creature Scathlin, though heaven knows why any such thought
should have entered his head, seeing he was the injured, not the
injuring.  But the more he thought about it the more he felt that he
must search further.

To look any longer in the city was absurd.  He had already covered
every clue that he had found, and the railroad authorities were
beginning to grow weary of this assiduous young man with the firm jaw
and the blue-gray eyes of steel who steadily demanded the missing
man.  They offered to send him back to the scene of the accident with
a man to help him, and authority to get assistance from their workmen
to search the river and vicinity.  This offer Jasper finally accepted
and the next morning was on his way back.

The last time Holt had seen Scathlin he had not really seen him at
all, he had merely sensed his presence in the darkness.

They had both been sleeping--Scathlin with the relaxation of one who
no longer needs to be on the alert, Holt with half his senses on
guard--when the crash came.  Splintering glass and a rush of cold air
brought Holt clearly to himself.  The car had been turned on end and
was sinking, sinking down with creak and groan; and the two men were
thrown together for a moment into the aisle, clinging to the arms of
the seats.  Holt had heard the terrible oaths with which Scathlin was
wont to embroider his speech even on calmer occasions.  They sounded
now like a challenge to the Almighty.  The younger man had reached
out a hand in the darkness to strike the other, and had uttered a
single sentence "Cut that out!" but the profanity continued, and
Scathlin had struck him a blow blindly across his eyes which
bewildered him for a second and made the confusion more black and
terrible.  Then he had been aware that Scathlin was scrambling up
over the arm of the seat to the window, and was about climbing out.
The red glow from outside flared up and showed Scathlin's bulk
against the night, his head and shoulders already out the window, the
stream of oaths not so distinct now because they were flung to the
outdoor world.

It was then that he realized that Scathlin was escaping from him and
he must not let him get away.  Even in such a situation he remembered
his long quest, and pulling himself up by main force, caught Scathlin
by the foot.  Suddenly he remembered the curious actions of Scathlin
the day before, and his fumbling with his shoe-strings afterwards.
The shoe Holt held in his firm grip was laced and tied in a hard
knot, but Holt's knife was ready and he cut the string in several
places.  Scathlin did not stay for shoes.  He left his footgear
readily in his pursuer's hands and made good his escape, but Holt,
forgetful of his peril for the moment, searched in the shoe and found
a folded paper.

It was too dark to tell if the paper were one of those he sought.  He
put it safely in his pocketbook for further investigation, felt in
the shoe carefully once more to make sure there was not another, and
then climbed out of the window after Scathlin.  But when he dropped
into the melee below he could not see Scathlin anywhere.  There were
some rocks far below, and down there he had thought he saw a white
face as he first looked from the window before he leaped, when the
fire broke out with a flare.  But after he had dropped and found
himself in the water he could not quite locate the rocks again, and
while he was searching he saw another victim drop and sink and rise
again, and he went to her rescue.  So had Scathlin had his wish and
escaped from the train before they reached the region of Hawk Valley.

Holt and his assistant searched the scene of the wreck until the
young man was convinced that further search there was useless, and
sent the man back to the city.  Then he dropped down to the river
bank and talked with one or two men on the wrecking crew while they
were waiting for the construction train to come and bear them back to
their camp, and here for the first time he got a clue.  They had
found a man down on the rocks with a broken leg a whole day after the
others had been taken to the city hospital.  Some bushes had hid him
and no one had noticed him till they heard him groaning and cursing.
A man who said he had a shack "up a piece" had taken him in his
wagon.  He had promised to get a doctor and fix the man up.  The man
himself had begged them to shoot him.  He was almost out of his head
with suffering.  Their vague description tallied with Scathlin's
rough appearance and Holt became convinced he had found his man.

Making the best he could out of their indefinite directions, for they
really had not much idea of the locality of that shack themselves,
Holt started off in search.

He found Scathlin before nightfall that same day, lying alone and
moaning with pain and fever in the deserted shack.  The householder
had gone away at dawn on business, promising a speedy return, but had
not come back, and Scathlin, his broken bone set rudely by an
unskilled hand, lay suffering torments.  When Holt pushed the door
open and looked in he started up with a yell, his eyes protruding in
fear.  He thought that Holt was dead in the fire of the wreck, and
this was his spirit come to demand account.

It was only when Holt laid his cool hand on the dirty, crusted brow
and spoke in his quiet voice of command, that Scathlin settled back,
the terror still in his eyes, and consented to be still.  He began
gradually to realize that Holt was there in the flesh, and that not
for retribution either.  He had not succeeded in escaping his captor.
He never could do that.  But his captor would not be a tormentor.
That was plain.  He had heard that Holt was "square" with his men,
but had never believed it.  Now he had opportunity to judge for
himself.  And so cunning and contemptible was the creature that when
he was once assured of the fact that Holt would not strike him when
he was down, he at once set about to take advantage of it.  It was as
if he had found a spot of honor wherein Holt was vulnerable, and
there upon his bed of pain, in his loathsome helplessness, with no
one to relieve him but Holt, he attacked that one pregnable spot of
Holt's fortress.  Day and night he moaned and fretted.  Hour after
hour he demanded this and that, whining like a baby and cursing like
a demon by turns.

The householder did not return.  It is possible that something ill
befell him in that lonely plain over which he journeyed skirting the
desert; it is probable that he had had enough of Scathlin's
complaints and was glad to escape from his unwelcome guest.  However
it was; Holt was there alone with him for many days, nursing him as
tenderly as a woman might have done; bearing with his varying moods;
washing him, feeding him, cooling his hot forehead.  Only once did
Scathlin lapse from his role of pampered patient and beg with terror
and abject humility in his eyes and voice, and that was the day when
Holt declared his intention of going after a doctor.  Scathlin was
sure that Holt meant to desert him, and he cried like a baby, swore
like a mad man, and then pleaded and promised contritely.  But it was
all of no avail and Holt left him for a few hours, with a supply at
hand for every need, and went for a doctor.  Scathlin's cries and
curses followed him as far as he could hear, and something like pity
came into his heart for the poor, wicked old criminal, so that he
hastened his steps with all his might.

When he returned four hours later with a gruff but kindly doctor, the
cunning look came back into the little beady eyes, and the bristly
old jaw grew stubborn and selfish again.  He saw that Holt's honor
still held and he meant to get the worth of his money out of him.

The doctor came every few days after that and Scathlin improved
rapidly, growing more arrogant every day.

Holt went about silently for the most part; nursing the patient,
cooking his meals--there were a few supplies in the shack and Holt
had bought more when he went for the doctor; besides there was game
to be had for the shooting.  There was something about his set, stern
face even in his gentleness that sometimes shamed Scathlin and
silenced him for a while.  It was as if his mind was far away on
higher things, and Scathlin's petty torments did not reach up into
the rarefied air where he really lived.

Once when he was getting better and sitting up Scathlin attempted a
story, so vile and low that the devil himself must have originated
it.  He laughed immoderately as he told it, hoping to break the stern
sadness of Holt's face, which fairly made him frantic to look at, but
Holt looked at him with a kind of pity for a second, and then the
sternness grew terrible.

"Scathlin, cut that out, you beast!" he said, and left the cabin for
the open air.  It was that day that Holt had a struggle with himself
to stick to his job.

There was no longer the necessity that brought him.  The papers, the
rest of them, wherever they were, were surely not here.  Holt had
gone over every inch of Scathlin's clothes and possessions, and there
was no place where he could possibly have hid them about the shack
that Holt had not looked.  He had watched Scathlin by night and by
day when he did not know he was being watched, and he was convinced
that Scathlin was no longer protecting any papers of his.  The one
which he had taken from the toe of Scathlin's shoe had proved to be
his own and most important.  What Scathlin had done with the rest he
was not sure, but it was probable that he had given some of them to
Jean with the wallet which he had, of course, recognized, when he
picked it up and handed it to her.  It was also possible that the man
who owned the shack had, by some means, been wheedled into taking the
papers back to Harrington.  Every circumstance made his speedy return
to Hawk Valley advisable, and yet here he was chained to this
helpless, peevish old man, who when he was done with him, would, if
he could, stab him in the back for all he had done for him.

If anything of all this passed through Jasper Holt's mind as he paced
up and down alone outside the cabin, he kept it to himself, and it
made no mark upon his face.  Just as patiently and just as kindly he
waited on that ungrateful old creature, all the time seeming to live
himself on a higher plane and breathe a higher air; and the old man
hated him for it.

And so as the days at last came when the patient could walk about a
little, the beady old eyes took on new cunning, the grizzly jaw grew
more set, the whining complaints became more pitiful; and when Holt
urged that now the time had come when they might go home without harm
to the mending limb, Scathlin's eyes filled with fear, and he whined
and begged for just a little longer.  For once more the vision of the
stark tree against the sky, the swinging body, the retreating backs
of Holt's strong men, haunted Scathlin's memory; and his terror
returned with each day of his recovery.

One day when Holt had gone at last to a settlement to procure a wagon
and some other necessities for the journey, he returned to find the
cunning old ingrate gone!

At first it seemed only a relief from a disagreeable task, and he
would have let him go, only again there seemed that inner sense of
finishing a task which made him go out and search.  For he knew the
weak leg could not carry the man far, and he felt too that he must
keep hold of Scathlin and take him back to face what he should find
awaiting him in Hawk Valley of good or ill.  He might need the old
man for a witness.

And so he drew him from his crouching shelter, spoke to him firmly,
and made a compact with him, for he recognized his fear.  That night
saw the two again on their way to Hawk Valley.  Scathlin was to have
shelter and food, and work when he was able, but in return he must
abide by certain rules.  Scathlin, relieved and cunning still,
promised eagerly, with many mental reservations; and so the
pilgrimage at last was ended, and Holt was going back--back where the
girl he loved was staying--the girl he loved, but might not see!




CHAPTER XI

There had been no fuss made over Jasper Holt when he was born.  They
handed him an honored name from some fierce old warrior of a
forebear, relegated him to a fourth-story back nursery with a trained
nurse, and left him to himself.

His mother paused long enough before returning to her interrupted
social career to look him over, declare that he had nice eyes and she
believed his hair was going to curl; then she was swallowed up in the
world from which she had reluctantly stepped aside.  She had little
use for a son except to dress him in velvets and Lord Fauntleroy
collars and make of him a toy to amuse her guests.  Until he reached
that stage she saw very little of him.

Of his stern father he saw less.  He was immersed in business.  He
was rich, but what of that?  He had to make more riches to keep the
social whirl fed.

The baby had a face and form worth noticing, even in his first days.
The great blue eyes that had attracted his mother's flitting
attention, could be gray sometimes, and had in them depths of light
and wisdom that fairly startled his practical nurse.  He had the brow
of a philosopher, and gold hair rippled around the fine little head
like a halo.  The old warrior-namesake must have bestowed upon him
that firm chin beneath the cupid's bow of the lips, and surely an
angel had lent him that smile!

But as he grew older there came into his eyes a wistfulness that was
almost pathetic at times.  He was an affectionate child, quite
embarrassing his cold, reserved nurse with his demonstrations, but
winning the utmost devotion always from all who had to serve him.

He was not a good boy in the conventional acceptation of the word.
He sweetly and serenely had his own way in everything from the time
he could walk and talk.  He would neither eat what he did not like,
nor wear what he did not fancy.  He did not take kindly to his
mother's velvets and curls and lace collars.  He always disappeared
hopelessly when made ready for a dress parade.  He would fight any
bully on the back street who undertook to cheat the little lame
newsboy, and he was always trying to take the part of some weak dog
or child.  He could run down the street with the swiftness of a
swallow, his pockets full of sharp stones, and hit every electric
light in the block as he ran, and he was forever taking the blame
frankly of all the broken windows and looted garden plots in the
neighborhood.  In these days his acquaintance with his father was
limited to severe interviews in which stern threats and scathing
reprimands mingled with a galling sarcasm were dealt abundantly.  It
was as his clear eyes looked steadily, unafraidly, into the angry
steel ones of the man that his young face hardened, his warrior-chin
took a firm set, and the light in his face was deadened by a stab of
pain.  He was growing wise and losing his faith in the love he had
taken for granted in both father and mother.  It was at that time
that he lived mostly upon the street, and companioned with boys of
the rougher class.  No one but his nurse knew it, and she but seldom.
She was only too glad to have the time off duty.

It was when they discovered a childish plot in the neighborhood to
mob the president of a defaulting bank in which the hard-working
parents of some of his playmates had lost their all, that Jasper was
taken hold of by the law as leader and financier of the whole
enterprise.  Bravely, proudly, he took the whole blame, exonerating
the other boys, and declaring himself instigator of the affair.

His father paid a heavy fine to hush it up and took his son in
charge.  A merciless whipping was the beginning of that interview
between them, which the son received like a gentleman.  But when it
was over he lifted reproachful eyes, steadied his quivering
warrior-chin and said determinedly: "But all the same, father, I
think I was right!  That man had been stealing those poor people's
money!"

The father looked at the little son with the unbroken will and swore!
He took away the cheap little firearms that the boy had purchased
with his allowance for himself and the other boys, and he declared
the allowance should cease until such time as the boy would own to
his fault and come to his senses.  One isn't just quite sure, but,
perhaps after all, the removal of his allowance was the very best
thing that father ever did for his little, lonely son who had begun
so early to reform the world with a high hand.

Jasper went up to his room and thought.  Then he went out and
consulted with a newsboy friend of his, and presently he was
established on a paper route of his own.  For several weeks he sold
papers till he had enough money to replace his lost revolver.  Then
he was satisfied and retired from business for the time, but this was
not his first business venture, and his father began to discover that
the threat of taking away the allowance had no effect whatever on his
determined young son.

Yet in spite of his bravery and strength, in spite of his high
purposes and anarchistic tendencies, there was in the boy's nature a
great wealth of love and a desire to be loved.  He was, in his
younger days, forever throwing his arms about his beautiful mother's
neck and kissing her to her great disgust and the severe detriment of
her complexion; until finally he became shy about showing his
affection, and the lines of loneliness and yearning grew deeper about
the young mouth.

It was the time he ran away that made him sure that no one cared for
him.

Jasper had been up before the paternal tribunal for some trivial
offense, and his word had not been taken in explanation, against the
word of his younger brother--who had arrived on the scene some three
years later than himself, and through some strange fantasy of
selfishness was the beloved darling of his mother.

Perry Holt had sharp little effeminate features like his mother's,
and had been petted and spoiled from the moment his whimsical mother
first saw him.  If there was any trouble Perry was usually at the
bottom of it and Jasper was blamed for it, because Jasper was "so
queer" and "so wild" and "always getting into trouble and doing what
he ought not to do."  That was the way his mother put it.  And so she
had ordered Jasper to his father's den for a reprimand for something
Perry really had done, and Jasper's word was doubted!

He took his punishment silently and went to his room and his bed,
where he lay motionless staring into the darkness.  If he had been a
girl he might have sobbed, so hurt was his soul; but being Jasper he
held back the stinging tears that burned his eyes and stared hard
into the dark.  At midnight, when the servants were asleep, he arose
and stole softly from the house before his mother and father had
returned from some social function they were attending.

He stayed away three days, companioning with waifs who had no homes,
and then his homesick heart brought him back again with longing to
see his mother.  He reached the house at early dusk and found his
mother and Perry getting into the car to ride to the station where
they were to meet his father and take a pleasure trip to Washington
for a few days!  They had not even missed him and were going off
without knowing where he was!  His mother looked at him with disgust
and told him to go into the house and wash his face, that he "looked
a perfect fright"; and then the car whirled off and left him gazing
after his dream of what a mother ought to be.

After that Jasper never expected anything more from his mother or his
family.  He began to see that life was meant to be a lonely job and
it "was up to him" how it turned out.  He seemed to grow up and be
wise beyond his years in that few seconds that he stood gazing after
the car vanishing in the dusk.

When it was discovered that he was spending most of his time on the
street in the company of newsboys and working men's sons, he was
fitted out expensively and sent away to boarding school where he
began a lively career.  Those who understood him adored him, but they
were few, and were mostly confined to small boys and the working
class.  The little boys in the school followed him like flies after
molasses and obeyed him abjectly.  The teachers dreaded and feared
and hated him almost to a man, with the exception of now and then a
woman who had an unusual amount of fine instinct and saw the yearning
for love in his eyes.

From school to school he went, out of one scrape into another, yet no
one stopped to enquire what it was all about or to discover that
almost every trouble he got into was for the sake of someone else, or
some real principle.  That his efforts at reform were against the
rules of the school, and could therefore but fail, made no difference
to him.  He went right on setting things right as far as he could and
then taking the consequences.  He saw the futility of his efforts and
sometimes clenched his sturdy fists and thought of the future when he
should be able to "lick" those unfair teachers who couldn't see that
they were letting some fellows go scot free who were more to blame
than the ones who were punished.  Some day he would be bigger than
they, and then he would back up his protests with a strength that
could not be gainsaid.  And so he went on fighting bullies who were
bigger than himself and who did not hesitate to put the whole story
in a good light for themselves; and taking the consequences in such a
way that when he left a school the principal had beneath his open
relief a troubled undertone of smallness, and of feeling that, after
all, the boy had got the better of him, for there had been the look
of a conqueror in Jasper's eye as he parted from him at the station.

Somehow he got himself through with his preparatory studies and was
allowed to pass on.  It surely was not from any great scholastic
attainments, for he never bothered himself to learn lessons that he
did not care for, nor to recite them after he had learned them, and
examinations meant nothing at all to him.  If he chose to take one he
did so, and then spoiled the whole paper by some erratic tirade of
his own on some special question; or else took the whole thing as a
joke.  If he did not choose to take an examination he calmly sat
through the allotted time intent upon his own thoughts and handed in
no paper at the close.  His teachers raved and ranted.  They punished
and they threatened.  But Jasper went calmly on and did as he
pleased; and strange to say in all that checkered career there were
but two teachers who understood, the soul with whom they had to deal,
and could lead him like a lamb by a mere smile or word to do the
hardest tasks.  For those two he slaved, not because he saw any
reason in their demands always, but because he desired to please
them, for they had proved themselves what he called "square."

Nevertheless he had acquired through it all a most marvellous and
varied amount of knowledge.  Nothing escaped him.  He never forgot
anything he heard, and the classes through which he had sat,
perpetrating many of his jokes upon the teachers, had all left their
impress upon him.  What he had heard the other students recite, that
he knew.  If you began to quote a line of poetry which had been
studied in English class he would promptly finish it and, when he
chose, tell you much about the author.  His teachers would have been
amazed if they could have heard him.  And often when another fellow
took a high rank in the class in mathematics it had been Jasper who
had showed him how to work his problems--problems that he had not
taken the trouble to work out for himself.

"Why should I?" he once answered a troublesome principal who was
admonishing him about preparing his lessons, "I get what I need out
of them, and that's all that's necessary, isn't it?  It's my
education, isn't it?  My teacher isn't getting any good out of my
writing out all that junk, is he?  It isn't doing him any good, why
should I take the trouble?"

And this was his hopeless attitude whenever he had to deal with
teachers whom he did not reverence.

In college he was much the same, only that it did not matter there so
much.  There were more men and he was less under authority.  It was
expected that he should have some independence.  Yet even here he was
mixed up in a great many of the troubles.  Finally, in his third
year, his college career came to a sudden and final ending in the
midst of a disgrace that was not his own, but which he took upon his
own sturdy shoulders to save another youth who had a widowed mother
dependent upon him, and must get through college before he could
support her.  Whether or not his action was justified by the
following chapters of that weak and careless youth's life is not a
part of this story to tell.  It may be that Jasper himself learned
some lessons by the disgrace he took upon himself and the lightness
with which the real criminal accepted his sacrifice.  However that
may be, Jasper's mother, by that time an attractive widow, was so
thoroughly outraged by her son's behavior--she never knew, of course,
that he himself had not been at fault--that she drove him from his
home in scorn and contempt.

Hurt to the heart the boy obeyed; too proud to explain; knowing she
would be but the angrier if she knew the truth; knowing there was no
mother heart in her for him, nor ever had been.

He went straight to the great, wide, free west, and roamed for a year
from one place to another restlessly, still expecting some day to
return when his mother should feel differently.  Then he saw in the
papers the notice of her marriage to a man he never had liked, and so
he settled down on the claim he had already taken, and built up
around his young, lonely life a something which he called home.

Gradually the outcasts of society had been drawn to him for help or
comfort in dire need and peril from the law; and always he had
sympathy with any who were without the pale of the respectable world,
even though in no other way could he feel anything congenial about
them.  His home came to be the refuge for sinners, and because their
crimes were many and his hearth was wide, their sins were fastened to
him in name if not in deed; as when a child he bore the blame for
others and himself grew strong.

He built them rude dwellings on his land, and some he chose to be his
trusted ones.  One by one he tested them and found them true to him
and to his few simple principles of life.  Sternly he ruled them, and
greatly did they love and reverence their boy leader, and were proud
to follow him.  If one of them transgressed again he was dealt with
justly; and once a body swayed and hung stark against the sky in
justice for a deed of shame.  It was this memory that Scathlin held
and feared, although it had happened long before he came to take
refuge from some petty deed of his.  Scathlin had never entered the
closer brotherhood of men who guarded Holt's own private quarters.
His place had been upon the outer edge of things.  He was not
trusted--never had been--and knew he was not trustworthy.  So it was
that he dreaded going back to those relentless men, who, if they once
found out that he had robbed their leader of valuable property and
betrayed him into the hands of an enemy who had long looked with
hungry eyes at the rich silver mine and abundant water supply that
were his, would stop at nothing till justice had been done upon his
contemptible head.  But by that same honor that made men love and
serve him, old Scathlin knew that Holt had not yet told his men about
his loss of the wallet, nor whom he suspected.

This was Jasper Holt, and this his story up to the time that he met
Jean and laid his roses at her threshold.




CHAPTER XII

It was late when Jean awoke.  The household had been quiet on her
account, and breakfast was delayed.  Jean came down white with her
vigil, but sweet and smiling notwithstanding.

The morning had brought clear vision and she was sure now that the
paper in her possession must be given to Holt and no other.  She had
settled so much and would await her opportunity.  This decided, her
mind was at peace, and she entered the dining-room with a smile of
greeting for everyone.

Late as it was, the master of the house had not yet appeared and the
family stood about waiting for him.  But as Jean entered the servant
came in from an opposite door with his arms full of roses, and stood
before her.

Such roses!  Jean had never seen such wealth of beauty, such
luxuriance of coloring.  They all exclaimed in wonder over them!
Clear golden-yellow with a deep, rosy tint at heart like liquid
rubies spilled into them.  Great heavy-headed buds and full blown
roses in abundance, many of them still on the trailing vines, as if
they had been plucked with ruthless hand to offer to a queen; their
fragrance filled the room like a burst of incense from some oriental
shrine.  The servant laid them in her arms as though he were offering
her a crown and sceptre.

"How wonderful!" murmured the girl, receiving them and laying her
face reverently down to their exquisite beauty.  "Where did they come
from?  Are they mine?  Do they grow here?"

"I found them at the door, Miss," said the man respectfully.
"There's only a card with your name."

"Why, how strange!" said Mrs. Harrington, stepping forward to inspect
the card.  "Who could have sent them?  I have told a number of the
young men about your coming, and they are all eager to see you; but
it's strange that whoever sent these beautiful roses shouldn't have
given his name.  They are wonderfully rare.  Somebody must have
squandered his month's earnings on them.  They couldn't have been
bought around here.  I suppose they came from some florist a long way
off."

The discreet servant narrowed his eyes and turned away suddenly as he
saw his master enter.

"Just look here, James, what beautiful roses someone has sent Jean!
Wasn't that lovely of him, whoever he is?  They were at the door when
John opened it this morning, and no name on them!  Who do you suppose
could have sent them?  Stockton Holmes, or Gartney Fowler, or even
Captain Wetherill, perhaps?"

But the master of the house glanced sharply at the roses and a frown
came between his brows.

"There's only one place around here where roses like that grow," he
announced ominously.

His wife looked at him with a frightened expression.

"You don't mean----?"

"Yes," said Harrington.  "They're Holt's Golden Sunset!"

There was an ominous silence as the husband and wife looked at each
other.  Then Mrs. Harrington turned to her sister, who stood behind
her roses with an exquisite flush on her cheeks and a soft, burning
light of battle in her eyes.

"Jean, did you know where they came from?" her sister asked, almost
haughtily.

But Jean's lovely face showed no sign of intimidation as she raised
it, gravely sweet, from the roses which she held as she might have
held a little child.

"I thought perhaps Mr. Holt sent them," she said simply.  "He told me
about his roses.  But excuse me just a minute till I put them in
water.  I won't keep you waiting."

When Jean returned after laying her roses tenderly in the wash-bowl
in her room and bending to touch her lips to their petals, there was
no look on her face as if anything unusual had passed except a kind
of glorified light in her eyes.  She began at once to give her sister
a message from their mother, tactfully ignoring the flowers and their
donor.  But Harrington's set look did not relax during the entire
meal.

After breakfast there was the whole place to be seen; the garden, the
horses, the rabbits, and the new lawn-tennis court, the only one in
town, where the young officers from the Fort came down to play
sometimes.

The children came out of their shyness and adopted their new relative
ecstatically, monopolizingly.  They drew her down on the garden seat
and plied her with questions, and they chattered away happily,
feeling her hair, touching her cheek softly now and then, playing
with the ribbons at her throat.

"Papa's awfully angry that Jasper Holt brought you home," confided
Betty.  "I heard him tell mamma he'd rather have lost fifty thousand
dollars than had it happen."

The color stole into Jean's cheeks and a flash came in her eyes, but
she tried to control herself.  She did not want to discuss this
matter with the children, and yet she felt that she must be true to
the man who had saved her life.

"Mr. Holt was very kind to me, Betty," she said quietly.  "I'm sorry
he is not a friend of your papa's.  If he hadn't taken care of me I
would probably have drowned, and I'm sure I never would have got
safely here.  He was wonderful!"

"Jasper Holt's a bad, wicked man," said Jamie, looking at her with
round eyes and a frown that was a very good imitation of his
father's.  "He-he-he _hanged_ a man once!  On a _tree_!  Yes, he
_did_!  Tied a string around his neck and hung him up hard till he
died!  He's a _nawful_ bad man.  Nicky Deens told me that.  My mamma
don't know he told me.  Nicky said not to tell.  But Nicky Deens saw
the tree once when he went with his papa out to the desert riding,
and he heard the men tell all about it.  They didn't know he heard
it, but he _did_."

"I don't think much of a little boy that tells you not to tell your
mother things," said Jean in a choking voice.  "I don't believe I
shall like Nicky Deens."

"Oh, you will," said Jamie in distress for his friend.  "He's a
_nawful_ nice boy.  He can ride a horse just like his papa----" and
Jamie launched into a description of the prowess of Nicky Deens, but
Jean, although she tried to smile, was not listening.  Her heart was
in a tumult and her eyes were full of fire and indignation.  Jasper
had told her about that man who hung on the tree.  She knew the whole
story with all its circumstances, and she knew that Nicky Deens had
heard a false account of the affair.  Suddenly she turned on her
astonished young nephew and spoke:

"Jamie," she said looking earnestly into his big, blue eyes, "Jamie,
I want to tell you something.  That story you heard about Mr. Holt is
not true.  He is not a bad man.  People don't know.  He is good and
kind, and he has been Auntie Jean's friend.  It isn't right nor fair
for you to listen to stories about him.  Little boys like Nicky Deens
don't know about things always, and maybe they don't mean to tell
what isn't true, but if you love Auntie Jean and believe she tells
you what is true you will not let anybody say bad things any more
about Mr. Holt.  It isn't necessary for you to talk about it at all
if your papa doesn't like Mr. Holt, but you don't need to listen to
unpleasant things about him.  People have not understood Mr. Holt, or
they would not have talked that way."

Jamie looked at her with round, wondering eyes, and his paternal
frown grew.  He did not like to have his thrilling story spoiled by
being told it was not true, but then, this new aunt had pretty eyes
and a smile that was good.  Besides, she had promised to tell him a
story, so, with mental reservations, he said:

"Aw right, I won't!" and sighed to relinquish this choice bit of
gossip, even during the period of his aunt's stay.

It was a relief to Jean that her sister came just then and sent the
children off to play, sitting down for a real visit about home and
their dear ones.

Finally there came a pause in their conversation about home and the
two sisters looked at each other contentedly, glad to be together
again after the long separation.

"Jean, dear," said Eleanor eagerly, "I hope you're going to have a
lovely time while you're here.  I've told every man in the region
about you and they are dying to call on you.  I don't know how many
have tried to bribe me to let them be first.  There are no end of
charming young fellows here.  The Post being so near brings some of
them, you know, and they love to come over to our house and get a
real home meal and a glimpse of something like what they are used to.
There's Charlie Evans, you'll like him I know.  He's quite
serious--thought of studying for the ministry at one time, but I
understand he began to be rather skeptical and gave it up.  You'll be
just the one to do a little missionary work on him.  You have great
talents in that direction I remember.  Mother has been telling me
what wonders you've worked in your Sunday School class at the
mission.  And there's Freeman Thorne, he's grave and serious enough
to suit your solemnest mood; and there are scores of others.  You'll
have flowers and invitations, more than you can attend to, pretty
soon.  We've lots of plans made already to help you have a good time.
But I want to give you a little warning, dear."  A kind of constraint
came in her voice.  "Don't speak about Jasper Holt unless you have
to, and then the very briefest word.  He isn't in good repute at all,
indeed, he isn't!  I understand how grateful you feel, of course; you
weren't in a position to judge what kind of a fellow he was.  I don't
suppose one's manners would show up very badly in the woods when two
people had been drowning and barely escaped with their lives.  People
don't think of manners at such a time----"

"Eleanor, he was a perfect gentleman," put in Jean indignantly.
"There were lots of chances to show unrefinement, and he was a
_perfect gentleman_ every time.  You don't understand, Eleanor."

"Well, now dear, you'll have to trust me a little.  I know just what
he is, _a bad man_--a really _bad_ young man!  Papa wouldn't have
your name mixed up with his for _anything in the world_!  I know you
can't be convinced, just now, because you've come through an unusual
experience together, and I'm sure I'm glad if he was half decent--it
wasn't to be expected--though it's what I've always claimed, that a
really nice girl always has the upper hand of a man, even a bad man,
and he dare not be rude to her.  Then, of course, it was quite
thoughtful of him to leave those roses the way he did and go away
without any message.  I'll give him credit for that.  But it was most
unfortunate that he should have been the one to save you!  Papa would
not at all approve of your having anything more to do with him
whatever."

"That is just what he said," said Jean quietly.

"What _he_ said!" exclaimed her sister.  "Really!  Then he does
realize a little what people think of him!  Well, that is a
commendable attitude, of course, and if you think it necessary, you
might write a formal little note, very brief, and thank him for
bringing you home, but make him understand that he is not to
presume--or, if you prefer, I might do it for you.  On second thought
I think mamma would prefer that I----"

"It is not in the least necessary, Eleanor; I have thanked Mr. Holt
already, and he understands perfectly that it would not be agreeable
to you to have him come here.  You said you had sewing to do, don't
you want me to help you with something?  I'd love to."

There was a dignity in the set of the head and the firm curve of lip
that made Mrs. Harrington survey her young sister with wonder and
silence as they arose and went toward the house.  The way Jean had
set aside the topic of young Holt was masterly.  Mrs. Harrington had
not said nearly all she meant to say on the subject, but somehow she
did not see the way clear to open the subject again at present.  She
looked at Jean uneasily from time to time as they sat together in the
house, or went about from room to room, flying from one topic to
another as people will do who have been long separated.  Three
distinct times did Mrs. Harrington essay to give an extended
dissertation on the evil deeds and reputation of Jasper Holt, and
each time the subject was as summarily closed, and quietly set aside
by Jean as if she had no interest whatever in the young man.  It gave
the woman almost an uncanny feeling, and actually disturbed her
seriously, so that she was threatened with one of her nervous
headaches; and after lunch, having had to confess to her husband that
she had made no headway in doing his bidding about enlightening her
sister with regard to his enemy, she retired to her darkened room to
sleep.  Jean, glad of escape to quiet, fled to her roses.

Broodingly, as a mother would touch her little child while it sleeps,
Jean hovered over those flowers.  The door was locked safe from
intrusion, and the children sent to a neighbor's that the house might
be quiet.  She drew the little table near the great window chair, and
placed the bowl of roses upon it.

They filled the bowl, lying heavy-headed in great sheaves over its
rim on their cool, luscious leaves, those leaves of that peculiar
green touched with burnt sienna on tips and veins, that speak of a
high state of cultivation, and rare stock.  She laid her cheek
against the cool yellow of the flowers, then her lips, then her
closed eyelids, while she let her thoughts rove back to the yesterday
and the time when their giver had been at her side; the words he had
spoken, the way he had looked, the sound of his voice, and the firm
clasp of his hand.  It all rushed over her in a tumult of joy and
sorrow.  This was the man she knew, so kind, so tender, so strong, so
true; and that other was the one they thought he was!  She could
never feel that way about him no matter what people told her, for she
had seen what they had not.  If they had been there in her place and
he had been that strong companion and friend they might have
understood.  She would, of course, respect their wishes, and not do
anything to trouble those who loved her; but she would trust him
always.

And now there stirred in her mind the remembrance of that paper, the
disposition of which she must decide at once.  How should she get it
to him?  It would not do to send for him.  He could not, probably
would not, come if she did.  Even a letter which did not explain too
much would be a difficult thing to manage, at least until she knew
the way to the post-office and could mail it herself.  If it were
carried by a servant or a member of the family it might be subject to
inspection.  Yet the paper ought to go to him at once.  Still, of
course, in her keeping it was at least out of his enemies' hands, if
enemies they were, these dear people of her own family.  Oh, why were
things at once so bitter and so sweet in this hard, bright world?
She buried her face in the roses again and let their sweetness rush
over her.  As she did so a slight rustling sound startled her, and
when she lifted up her face and then pressed it close again she heard
it once more.  Curious, with a wild fleeting hope floating through
her brain, she sat up and began to touch the buds and blossoms
softly, eagerly, searchingly with her fingers.  Yes, there it was,
that sound of crackling paper!

She folded back the petals of the largest bud, and there, laid deftly
in like another flower-leaf, she found a tiny bit of folded paper.
Eagerly she took it out and opened it, for it was very thin and
folded close, and there was writing, small and fine, but boldly,
distinctly clear:

"I have to go away.  For how long I do not know.  I shall not forget
my promise.  You may trust me.  I hope you have a happy time."

The tears were in her eyes as she read the brief message over and
over again, and laid her lips upon it.  Bright drops fell upon the
roses and stood like dew drops.

She searched the other blossoms carefully, but there were no more
messages, and she had known there would not be.  He would not think
it "square" to write more of the things that were in his heart, and
she loved him the more for his sense of honor toward her.

Then she remembered the water contract.

Now, what should she do with the paper?  She could not give it to him
while he was away.  It might await his return and be lost if she
trusted it to the mail.  She must wait for a few days and see if he
came back; and meantime she would listen and watch as far as it lay
in her power, that no harm came near his rights.  If worst came to
worst she would confide in her father.  He was wise, and he would
understand.  He would feel as she did about this matter if he knew
all.  The difficulty would be to make him know all through the medium
of a mere letter.  But for the present she would wait.

A sense of desolation settled down upon her when she realized that
Holt was gone away; yet she was at peace about it.  At least she need
not always be fearing lest her relatives should be unpleasant to him,
or that embarrassing circumstances might arise where she would be
obliged to choose between her sense of loyalty to her lover and her
sense of loyalty to her relatives in whose home she was a guest.  But
for a little time she put away these thoughts and let her happy heart
dwell on the fact that he had sent these glorious roses with their
secret message; and finally she lay down for a rest and slept, with
one great yellow bud nestled against her cheek.




CHAPTER XIII

The days which followed fulfilled all Mrs. Harrington's prophecies so
far as gaiety was concerned.  One round of pleasure succeeded
another.  The days were filled with picnics and rides and the
evenings with merry makings of all descriptions at all the houses in
the region round about Hawk Valley.  There were not wanting many
young officers and others who were eager to teach the sweet young
stranger from the east to ride.  Horses especially trained and
gentled for her use were brought as offerings at her shrine, and
flowers from near and far were sent to her.  The Harrington children
were in danger of becoming chronic dyspeptics on the surplus of the
confections with which she was constantly supplied; and there was no
opportunity for her to become lonely or morbid as the summer days
sped by in a round of pleasure.

Yet through it all Jean moved, lovely and serene as a summer morning.

"She acts as if she had been in society for years," complained
Eleanor to her husband.  "Nothing moves her out of her quiet dignity.
She doesn't gush or become enthusiastic at anybody.  The sky and the
flowers and the children please her more than all the adulation she
receives.  One would almost judge her engaged or married already.  I
wonder if it can be there is a sweetheart at home that we don't know
about.  I must write and ask mamma.  I can't make it out.  I thought
Captain Hawthorne would surely make an impression, he has such
charming manners, and is so deferential to women; but she looked at
him to-day with that sweet far-away expression, exactly as she might
have looked at her grandfather.  Of course it made him desperately
determined to get her attention, but she never seemed to know nor
care.  One would almost think it was a studied pose to get as many at
her feet as possible, if one didn't know Jean better."

"Did you ever think that perhaps her thoughts are with that scoundrel
Holt?" her husband asked.

"Nonsense!" said his wife sharply.  "She never mentions him.  She has
forgotten all about him.  I think she was extremely annoyed at our
making so much of his bringing her home."

"Well, don't you be too sure.  I wonder where the deuce he is.  I'll
be willing to bet he's up to some mischief."'

"Don't worry," said his wife, "I'm only too glad he's taken himself
away.  I hope he'll keep hidden until Jean is safely home again so we
won't be annoyed."

"I hope he'll come back and let us see what he's up to," growled her
husband as she left the room.

And at last one day shortly before Jean was to return to her father's
house, Holt came back.

With him appeared Scathlin, riding into town daily, side by side with
the younger man, on one of Holt's horses; looking older, with a
sheepish expression and a shifty eye that failed to meet men's gaze.
It was rumored that Holt had found him with a broken leg, nursed him
into strength again and brought him home.  Those who knew Scathlin
felt that Holt's power over him was more than that of gratitude.

It happened that Jean was riding with the Captain one morning when
they came down to the post-office together, and the glad smile with
which she greeted Holt was followed by a frightened expression as she
recognized Scathlin.  Her escort was so astonished at having to lift
his hat to Holt that he failed to notice her startled glance.

No one could have told by Holt's grave bow that he was meeting the
one of all the earth to him.  Only the light in his eyes told of his
joy in seeing her once more, and reassured the girl as she glanced
from Scathlin back to his own face.  It was Captain Hawthorne's
annoyed drawl that recalled her to the present out of the whirl of
joy that the sight of Holt brought.

"Where in the world did you ever meet that scoundrel that he should
presume to speak to you?"

A flush of indignation rose to her cheeks, her chin tilted just the
slightest bit haughtily, and her eyes held a dangerous light in them.

"Excuse me, Captain Hawthorne, Mr. Holt is my friend.  He did me the
greatest service one can do for another.  He saved my life."

"I beg your pardon, Miss Grayson, I didn't mean to offend you.  That
alters the case of course.  One is always grateful for one's life,
and may thank even a dog.  You can afford to be generous, sometimes,
but have a care!  You do not know Holt!  It's the only good thing I
ever heard of him, that he saved your life.  I would it had been my
privilege instead of his."

"Thank you, Captain Hawthorne," Jean spoke frigidly, "but you
misunderstand me.  I am not speaking to Mr. Holt because I am
grateful or generous, but because I honor and trust him as a friend."

"You do not know him, Miss Grayson.  He is not a man whom anyone
trusts."

"It is you who do not know him, Captain Hawthorne.  I know him better
than you, and I trust him entirely.  During our terrible experience
together at the time of the wreck I had ample opportunity to test Mr.
Holt, and I found him a gentleman and a true friend in every trying
situation."

And now indeed Jean's tone was unmistakable, and the alarmed Captain,
who had congratulated himself that he was making pretty good headway
with the fair lady, made hasty apologies.

"I beg your pardon, of course," he said humbly.  "I'm sure I'm glad
to hear that he behaved decently.  To tell you the truth I don't know
much personally about Holt.  I've only taken what others say; and
I've always thought his reckless appearance bore out their
insinuations.  Forgive me if I have annoyed you, and try to forget
what I've said.  This day is perfect and the road is particularly
fine.  Shall we try a gallop?"

Jean was glad of the relief from conversation, and kept her horse on
a wild gait the most of the way; for her mind was in a tumult.  How
was she to get that paper to Holt and what should she say in
explanation of its being in her possession?  The question had been
much in her mind during Holt's absence, and she had been unable to
decide just what she should do when he returned, but now it must be
decided at once, for there ought to be no delay about the paper.  The
sinister look in the faded blue eye of Scathlin as he looked at her
made her fear to keep it in her possession any longer.

The ride at last was ended.  It had not been a very great success
from the Captain's point of view and he went away dejected, while
Jean hurried to her room and tried to plan what to do.  The sight of
Scathlin worried her.  If the old man knew what papers the wallet had
contained he probably knew the significance of each.  The
conversation she had overheard seemed to include him in the plot, if
plot there was, against Holt.  Of course, since he had returned, he
would seek out the other two men and explain why he had sent the
wallet; and perhaps he had the other missing paper himself, the one
that contained valuable information about the location of ore.  It
was even possible that he knew already that she, his unwilling
messenger, had the water contract.  He must have known it was in the
wallet when he gave it to her and it would be entirely natural for
him to think she had taken it out.  Something in the gleam of his eye
as he looked at her had made her tremble; and she longed to fly
straight to Holt and give him the paper frankly and openly, but it
was a matter that could not be handled openly, and she was not a
diplomat, therefore she trembled.

Finally, after careful thought, and much writing and tearing up of
what she had written she framed a brief note to Holt.

On the morning that she mailed it Scathlin happened to be in the
village.

Holt had gone away very early in the morning, on a matter of
business, leaving word that he might not return until the next day,
and Scathlin felt like a prisoner let out of jail.  It was his first
opportunity to go about without Holt's eyes upon him.  True, he was
under oath to do and not to do certain things, with penalty of a
judgment which he knew would not be light.  Yet his natural cunning
found many ways to carry on his schemes without violating the letter
of his contract with Holt.  He knew that Holt had brought him there
as a witness against his enemies in the case of the stolen papers--he
knew this, though Holt had said no word of it to him--and he knew
that Holt would watch him closely--that he probably had him under
espionage even during this brief absence; yet he longed to outwit his
keeper and get the better of him.  If it only had not been for the
loss of that water contract his way would have been plain.  He had
already managed an interview with Harrington and learned the facts
without revealing all the facts in his own possession.  He professed
to Harrington that all the original papers were in the wallet when he
gave it to the girl, and that it had been his only hope of saving
them from Holt.  That Holt had managed to save the girl and bring her
home only proved that he was as hard to get away from as the devil
himself.  This explanation Scathlin devised while he listened to
Harrington's story, secretly realizing, with bitterness, his own
blunder in leaving the water contract in the wallet.  His excuse was
that he had no time to take out another paper and secrete it safely
before Holt saw him.

Might and day Scathlin worried over that water contract, coming
always back to the conclusion that Holt must have it or know where it
was; and he had searched every available hiding place in Holt's house
for it, but failed as yet to discover it.  When they met Jean riding,
the old man had noted carefully the expression on his companion's
face as he touched his hat to her, and the lighting up of the girl's
face.  His keen little eyes searched, and found an idea.

Therefore, that first morning of his freedom from Holt, when he sat
on the curbstone with one of the men from the Divide, talking over
the latest cattle stealing, his eye took in with keen interest the
figure of Jean coming down the street accompanied by her little
niece, a bundle of letters in her hand to be mailed.  He watched her
furtively as she passed him, though she did not see him, and as soon
as she was inside the post-office door he got up hurriedly and
followed her, professing that he had an errand.

He watched her slipping her letters one by one into the post box, and
kept his eye upon her as she turned and went out again.

He made a small purchase at the counter on the other side of the
post-office room, and went out, but an hour later, when he returned
that way, the postmaster leaned from his window and called him.
"Hey, there, Scathlin, goin' up home?  Here's a letter fer Holt."

Scathlin, wary as any fox, concealed the start he almost gave, and
turned with indifference.

"'Spose I might's well take it," he said, and receiving the letter,
went on his way toward home.

The way was long and bright and hot, and Scathlin was not feeling up
to a hard walk yet after his weeks in bed; but he managed it in an
incredibly short space of time, and as he walked he studied that
letter.

It was dainty and white, the writing unmistakably feminine, and
mailed in Hawk Valley.  Scathlin's imagination stirred within him,
and he was almost sure he needed to know what was in that letter.  He
held it up to the light but nothing was revealed.  He tried to pry
open a corner of the flap that was not closely sealed, and squint in,
but not a glimpse of writing was visible.  He went home, laid it on
the desk in Holt's office and sat down to watch it and think.  Then
just before the return for dinner of the other two men who were about
the place he quietly put it in his pocket.  He preferred to think
about that letter awhile longer before any one else saw it.  When
they came in Scathlin had the fire going and a fine steam ascending
from the tea-kettle, an unusual attention on his part toward other
members of his group, unless he was pressed to service.

But Scathlin had exhausted his capacity for work with putting on the
teakettle, for he sat dreamily meditating in a chair tilted back
against the wall, his feet on the rounds, a straw in his mouth, and
his eyes narrow and gleaming.

"Dear friend: I have something that I am sure belongs to you.  Is it
safe for me to send it to you through the mail?  I think it must be
valuable.  Please let me know quickly for I am going home in a few
days."

Those were the magic words the steam had revealed to Scathlin, and on
which he meditated with his eyes half closed while his companions
scornfully cooked the corn bread and bacon and cursed him for a lazy
good-for-nothing.  He continued his meditations unmoved until the men
had eaten and were gone on their way.  When they were out of sight he
arose with alacrity and prepared a hasty meal, keeping his eye on the
clock.  He ate hurriedly, cleaned and loaded a pistol which he took
from a hiding place behind a loose brick of the chimney, and went out
the back door toward the woods.

About the same time Jean Grayson mounted the pony that had been set
aside for her use while in Hawk Valley, and started out for her daily
call on an old lady who had taken a great fancy to her, because of
her likeness to a daughter long since dead.  She was fond of the
sweet old lady, and found her quiet little home a refuge from the
round of society that sometimes became almost oppressive at her
sister's house.  She had discovered that she could avoid certain
annoyingly frequent callers by being thus absent a little while, and
especially during the last two weeks she had made this pleasant
pilgrimage almost every day.  Perhaps a part of the pleasantness of
the trip was in the fact that the road lay back of Holt's land, and
his house, though almost a mile from where she had to pass, was
plainly to be seen at one high point on the road, as it stood boldly
against the sky, its wide verandas shrouded in rose vines.

Jean never ventured on the road that led past the house itself, for
it was off the general highway; but she had often longed to see the
spot where he lived at closer range.

As she rode along she mused about the letter she had written and
whether that had been the right way and the only way to do about
getting the paper into the hands of its owner.

She had once heard a great speaker say that there was never a
situation where there was not a right thing to do next.  She felt
sure she had done the right thing so far as her light showed her; and
yet she could not lay it aside and be at peace, but was in a tremor
of excitement awaiting Holt's reply.

As she reached the high point in the road she looked as usual off
toward the rose-vined dwelling, half hoping to see a sign of the
master of the house; but the vines lay shimmering in the sun of the
warm mid-day, and nothing seemed stirring about the place.  She
walked the pony slowly along until the house was out of sight, and
the road entered the shady quiet where wooded land on either side hid
the glare of the afternoon.  Just beyond the woods a few rods away
was the home of the old lady.  It was early yet and Jean lingered,
the pony nothing loath to follow her will.

They had gone perhaps fifty feet into the shadow of the wooded road
when suddenly, out from behind a great tree with stocky, brushwood
growth around it, slunk forth Scathlin, close to the pony, and laid
hands upon his bridle.

"I beg pardon, Miss, but Mr. Holt sent me on a message," lied
Scathlin, shifting his eyes hastily from the clear ones that looked
in horror upon him.

Jean's heart was beating wildly, not reassured by his words.

"He said would you please give me the paper you had for him.  It
would be safer for me to get it, as no one would suspect."

A great doubt seized Jean's soul.  Holt had not sent this bad old
man.  Hold could never trust such a man as this.  But if he did trust
him, she did not.

"Did Mr. Holt send me a letter?"  Jean looked keenly into the old
cunning face.

"Mr. Holt had to go away in a hurry and so he sent me," said Scathlin
glibly.  "He didn't have no time to write letters.  He said you
knowed me; that you'd seen me with him, an' you'd know 'twas all
right."

"Tell Mr. Holt, please," said Jean, making up her mind hurriedly,
"that there is nothing, and no message I can give to anyone.  I wish
to speak with him.  If that is not possible we will have to let the
matter pass."

She drew the rein and signed to her horse to go on, but Scathlin
jerked the birdie sharply:

"Not much, you don't go on," he threatened, "not till I get that
paper.  I was sent here to get it and I mean to have it.  You can't
come any of your pretty little tricks on me.  I want that paper and I
mean to have it.  Ef I can't get it one way I kin another!"  His
voice and eyes were ominous, and Jean was so frightened that her
throat trembled and she could scarcely control her lips to speak.

"Of what paper are you speaking?"

"That there paper you wrote about in the letter.  You know well
enough what I mean.  You've got it about you now.  I know you dassent
go off and leave it to home, where that fine brother-in-law of yours
could find it.  Come, are you going to fork over, or do you want me
to search you for it?  I'll find it quick enough."




CHAPTER XIV

Jean turned white with deadly sickening fear, but kept her head
courageously up.  She whipped up her pony and tried to get away, but
the strong hand held the bridle and the little beast could only rear,
almost throwing her.  Moreover, a gleaming pistol shone into Jean's
terrified eyes, and Scathlin in gloating voice spoke low:

"Oh, no, my pretty, you don't come any of your little tricks on me.
You've stole a paper I give you to give to your brother, an' I mean
to have it without any further nonsense.  Hand it over!" and he
grasped her roughly by the arm.

"Help!  Mr. Holt!  _Jasper!_" she screamed.

Something was stuffed into her mouth and the barrel of the pistol
gleamed between her eyes.  She could feel the cold steel against her
flesh.  The earth seemed reeling beneath her, and her senses were
going from her.  Was there no hope of help from anywhere?

"Now, my pretty, I'll just he'p myself to that paper."  Scathlin's
voice was malevolent, his eyes gleaming.  Like the cold slimy length
of a serpent coiling around her soul, the meaning of his words slid
about her consciousness.  She felt she was sinking out of the world
of knowledge into a blackness where she could not protect herself.

Then quickly, sharply, a voice brought her back to consciousness.

"Drop that pistol!  Let go of that lady!  Now, march!"

It was Holt's voice, low, merciless, commanding; and a revolver was
in his hand.

Scathlin fell away like water, turning deadly white and cringing.
The day of his judgment had come swiftly, and there was no escape.
He knew that look in Holt's eye.  He had sinned away his last
probation.  Holt would never trust him again.  There was not even
time to destroy the letter which he had wanted to keep and give to
Harrington as evidence against the girl.

"March!" said Holt's voice again, and the revolver came uncomfortably
near to Scathlin's temple.

Scathlin marched.

"Go straight to the house and wait there till I come," commanded Holt
as Scathlin backed weakly away.  "If you attempt to escape I'll turn
the bloodhounds loose after you."

Scathlin turned a shade paler.  He had had experience with one of
those bloodhounds.  He had no desire to meet the whole pack.  He
hastened his footsteps.

Jean sat with wild eyes watching, her hand upon her heart.

"You didn't send him for the paper, did you?" she demanded eagerly.
"I knew you would never have sent him."

"Send for the paper, what paper?" asked Holt in wonder.  "I never
sent him for anything."

"Then how did he know what was in my letter to you?"

"Letter?  What letter?  I never received a letter from you."

"Then he must have opened it and read it.  Oh, _he will show it to my
brother!_"

But Holt's voice rang out clearly before her sentence was fairly
finished:

"Halt!  Scathlin!"

Scathlin had almost reached the turning at the edge of the woods, but
he paused instantly.

"Come back here."

Scathlin came, cringing and white with fear.  When he was within ten
yards of the two Holt spoke again, and all the time the sinister
weapon kept guard in his hand aimed straight at Scathlin.

"Give me my letter."

"W-what l-let-tt-ter?" chattered Scathlin with ill concealed attempt
to use his cunning.

"The letter you have in your pocket.  Take it out instantly and drop
it on the ground or I shall fire," said Holt sternly.

"Well, put down that gun," whimpered Scathlin, fumbling nervously in
his inside pocket, "you make me n-n-nervous!"

"Be quick!  Drop that letter!" said Holt, still holding the revolver.

Scathlin took out the letter and dropped it on the ground, but his
bad little eyes gleamed green and yellow hate at the girl in one look
of wrath as he turned and stumbled back again.

Holt, still holding the revolver and watching the retreating man,
advanced and picked up the letter.  When Scathlin was out of sight he
read it, then turned with softened eyes to the girl who had meantime
secured the paper from its hiding place pinned within her blouse.
She held it out to him, her hand still trembling with the fright she
had been through.

Holt took the paper, but gathered the little hand into his tenderly
and, stooping, kissed it.

"To think you have been through all this for me."  There was awe in
his voice.  "To think you trusted me instead of your own people!"

For an instant they looked into each other's eyes; then Holt's horse,
trained to stand and await his master's will, whinnied softly.

"We must not stand here," said Holt, looking up sharply, "some one
might come.  I will take you on to Mrs. Foster's, and then go back
and see that Scathlin is where he can do no further harm.  How long
will you wish to be there?  Can you stay an hour and then ride back?
I will be waiting just in the shadow of the woods and see you to the
edge of town where you will be safe.  Please don't ride out of town
alone again."

"But I shall not be afraid to go back," protested Jean.  "You need
not take all that trouble.  Now that you have the paper I shall not
be afraid."

"Trouble!" said Holt, looking at her with eyes that adored.  "You
know it is no trouble.  But what is this paper that has made so much
disturbance?"  He had mounted his horse and was riding by her side
now.  He unfolded the paper, but it needed only a glance to show him
what it was.

"How did you happen to have it?" he asked, looking at her startled.
"Have you the others?"

"No," she said, a cloud of trouble coming into her eyes.  "I had
them, I suppose, but I did not know they were yours.  I had the
wallet, with them in.  That man gave them to me on the train before
the wreck.  You picked the wallet up once when it fell, don't you
remember?  Didn't you know they were yours?"

"Yes," said Holt, "I knew.  At least I supposed I knew."

"Why didn't you tell me?"

"I didn't want to mix you up in the trouble," he said, looking at her
tenderly, "and besides, I knew they were safe in your possession for
the present."

"But they weren't.  I didn't know they were yours, and I gave them to
my brother."

"I knew you would, of course.  But I was pretty sure I could stop any
harm he would do before he could do it.  The only thing I was
troubled about was this paper.  I didn't think Scathlin was fool
enough to leave all the papers in the wallet.  I was pretty sure he
had kept this and one other himself and only sent the rest back to
throw me off the track and make me think he had sent all of them.  He
knew I saw him give you the wallet and he meant I should see.  He
thought I would stop watching him and give my attention to you, but I
knew Scathlin better than that.  I kept my eye on him.  But how did
you happen to have this one paper?"

"I'm not sure.  When I came back to my room, after giving my brother
the wallet, I found this on my floor.  It may have fallen when I
dumped the things out of my bag.  The wallet fell apart and all the
papers went out on the table, but I thought I picked up every one.
Then when I came back to my room I found this on the floor just as I
was about to turn out the light.  Later I overheard a conversation in
which this paper and another were described as missing.  The other
was something to do with a mine----"

"Yes, I have it," said Holt.

"You have it?  Oh, I am so glad!  Then they can't trouble your claim,
can they?  I suppose that was what they meant, I'm not very much of a
business person.  But how did you get it?  They said it was in the
wallet."

"It was," said Holt, "till Scathlin took it out.  I think he intended
taking this, also, and leaving with you only the other papers which
were utterly valueless without these two; but he had to work quickly
while I was at the other end of the car, and he blundered.  I got it
out of Scathlin's shoe, just after the accident occurred, and before
I left the car we were in.  We had a struggle in the dark, but I
secured my paper before he flung me off and crawled out of the
window.  After that, I lost sight of him.  I was hunting for him in
the water when I found you.  I didn't know who you were till I drew
you up on the bank.  But I never dreamed you had this paper.  I
thought, of course, it was still with Scathlin.  That is why I was
away so long, hunting him.  I didn't know once but I'd lost him
completely, but I finally got on his track.  I was sure he knew where
this paper was and I didn't dare to lose him.  I brought him home to
watch him; and I've kept him in sight all day to-day.  He thought I
was away from home for two days, but I've been in hiding.  I had him
watched when he went to town and I knew he came home.  If he had had
this paper he would have gone straight to your brother.  A field
glass and a whistle will do a good deal to keep track of a man.  When
he stole out of the house toward the woods I knew something was
happening and signalled my men.  They are waiting now.  They'll look
after Scathlin till I get back."

He raised a tiny whistle to his lips and blew a long, silvery blast,
followed by two more, and in a moment there came back two answers
from slightly different directions.

They were come now to the open road, and Holt drew his horse to one
side.  Mrs. Foster's home was but a stone's throw away and she was
sitting on the porch in her reclining chair.

"I will be here when you are ready to go home," said Holt, looking at
her tenderly; then, touching his hat, he wheeled his horse and was
out of sight in a twinkling.

The next hour was always a blur in the memory of Jean.  Somehow she
drew her senses together and dismounted at her friend's door, going
through the formalities of meeting, and adjusting herself to the
occasion; but not for an instant did her subconsciousness cease to
rehearse the events just passed.  Her whole body quivered again with
the fear that swept over her at sight of Scathlin; she shrank once
more from his touch as the full realization of her escape was made
known to her; and the look and voice of Holt thrilled her as nothing
had ever done in her life.  How could they say he was not good when
he was like that?  She had seen the soul of him looking out of his
wonderful eyes and she knew.  But how had it come about that others
had not seen, also?  Oh, if they knew once; if they could just get a
real glimpse of the true man, they would never again feel as they did
about him.

She recognized fully the separation there was between them and it
brought a constriction of tears in her throat; but in her heart was a
glad glow that he cared for her, and for the time it seemed enough to
fill her with deep joy.  She was going to see him again in a few
minutes, and she could thank him for saving her life again, this time
perhaps from something worse than death.  She had had no words
wherewith to tell him of the infinite relief his appearing had
brought; everything had happened so quickly; but it seemed as if a
lifetime would be too brief to voice her gratitude for her
deliverance.  She shivered as she remembered the look on Scathlin's
face when he took hold of her.

Mrs. Foster said: "Why, you're not cold, are you, dearie, this warm
day?  I believe they are letting you do too much, with all their
parties and things.  You look white.  You'd better come down and stay
with me a week and get rested up."

But Jean's laugh rang silverly.

"Oh, no, I'm not cold, Mrs. Foster, I'm just glad over something.
It's very nice of you to ask me to visit you, and I would be
delighted, but you know I'm going home next week, and I'm afraid
Eleanor wouldn't want to spare me when the time is so short."

"Going home next week!" exclaimed the old lady, in dismay.  "Why, I
thought you were going to stay till Christmas."

"So I was, but father has to go to New York to a convention.  He's
been made a delegate, and it's a splendid thing for him.  He hasn't
had an outing in a long time.  He needs it; and we couldn't leave
mother alone you know.  Mother is an invalid.  So of course I'm going
home a little sooner.  But I've had a beautiful time here, and maybe
I can come again sometime."

All the time that Jean was talking her real self was thinking how
wonderful it had been that it was Holt who saved her again and not
just some passing stranger.

The hour was over at last and Jean joyously mounted her pony and bade
her friend good-bye; but when she rode into the shadow of the woods
and saw Holt on his shining black horse waiting quietly beside the
road for her, a great shyness overcame her, and she knew she would
never be able to put into words the great thoughts of her heart, and
that perhaps it was as well; for he would understand and words were
not necessary for them.  There could not be much said without saying
too much.

After all they said very little.  The way was short till they came to
the edge of town though they walked their horses as slowly as
possible; but there were looks and glances of the soul, trustful,
grateful, worshipful; and each felt the blessedness of these few
minutes alone together.

Holt told her briefly of Scathlin.  He was safe?  She need fear him
no more.  He would not be abroad to trouble her during the rest of
her stay.  His eyes more than his words informed her how he regretted
the brevity of that stay.  His eyes told her also that Scathlin's
judgment would be tempered with mercy and righteousness.

There was one question she wished to ask him.  She hesitated long but
finally risked it.

"You will enter the tournament?" she asked, lifting her eyes full of
pleading that his answer should be yes.  "You know about it, of
course?  You know they are giving me a tournament before I go home?"

He bowed gravely.

"Yes, I know.  You will like it.  It is one of the most interesting
affairs they have in town.  I am glad you will see it."

She saw he was evading her question.

"You will enter?" she asked again anxiously.

He searched her face keenly.

"You want me to?"

"I do, very much," she said, and the rich color in her cheeks told
him how much she wanted it.

"Your friends will not like it," he said.

"But the tournament is given for me, and I shall like it," she said
with spirit.  "I am sure you can ride."

"I can ride a little," he said indifferently.

"Then you will enter?"

"If you really wish it."

"I certainly wish it," she said gladly.

Then suddenly out from the woods rode two men; fine, tall, sturdy
fellows they were, perhaps ten or more years older than Holt, but
with strong faces, keen eyes, and muscles that looked like iron.

They saluted Holt as if he were their military officer, and one rode
close to him and said a few words in a low tone.  Holt nodded
gravely, his fine, boyish face taking on maturer lines as he gave
attention to the message, and uttered his brief, ready directions,
utterly unintelligible to the girl who looked on in bewilderment at
this new phase of the young man's character.

The second rider had halted at a respectful distance, without a
glance in her direction, and waited as a trained servitor should do.
Devotion to Holt and absolute obedience were in the attitude of both.

The interview occupied scarcely a minute; then the two men wheeled,
saluted, and rode away once more into the woods.

"A little trouble at the mine," Holt explained, in answer to her
questioning glance.  "It'll be all right now, since I have this paper
again.  We haven't dared to exercise our water privileges as we
should and have been moving under difficulties, but now that I have
the grant there will be no further trouble.  I'll take care it's put
where no one can steal it again."

"Oh, I'm so glad," breathed Jean, "but who are they?" pointing after
the two riders who were just disappearing behind the trees.

"My men," said Holt.  "I have fifty-four of them, fine fellows every
one."

"Your men?" questioned Jean in surprise.

"They work for me--in the mine and around the place.  I've picked
them up here and there.  That big fellow that waited--I took him down
from a tree where they'd hung him up for stealing a horse.  He's the
one I told you of--I thought he was dead, but there he is!  He
wouldn't take a pin now that belonged to anyone else.  He's the
straightest fellow on the place.  The other one was almost gone with
fever when I met up with him.  We've nursed each other twice apiece
since then.  There are others I'd like you to know if things weren't
as they are.  You'd see the good in them, I'm sure.  You seem to
understand."

Jean's eyes were alight as she watched him.

"They know you!" she exclaimed.  "They've seen the real _you_, and
they trust you!  I saw it in their eyes."

"Maybe," he said, returning her look.  "They'd fight for me any time
I asked it; and they'd die for me if it came to that."

"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends."  The words seemed to come of themselves from the girl's
lips as she watched the man in wonder and admiration.

"You took a mighty slim chance on yours for me about an hour ago."
Holt's eyes spoke volumes.  "Why didn't you give him the paper?  It
was by far the safest thing for you to do.  Didn't you know that?"

"Yes," said the girl, her soft lips setting in a firm line and her
chin taking the tilt that gave her sweet face its strength and
fineness.  "But the paper was yours, and I was sure it was valuable.
I didn't trust him."

"And you trust me yet, in spite of all the things I know you must
have heard about me?"

"I trust you _forever_!"

Her eyes were clear and steady, and her voice was sweet with a ring
of triumph in it as she made the declaration.

For a moment they looked at one another with a great blinding light
of deep gladness shining from their eyes; then the man bowed his head
gravely and, reaching over, took her hand in a strong, quick clasp.

"You shall never have cause to lose that trust," he murmured
solemnly, and turning, rode back into the woods and left her to go on
alone through the town.




CHAPTER XV

When Jean reached the Harrington home she found a group of girls on
the piazza, waiting for her, who chattered and laughed and took
absolute possession of her.  They were planning an all-day trip on
horseback with lunches and all sorts of interesting things by the
way, and Jean must help them.  Then they gave her no chance to speak,
but told her all in chorus, until she could scarcely make out what it
was about.  She smiled and agreed, but half the time she did not know
what they were saying, for something still and beautiful within her
soul was claiming her attention, something that seemed too high and
holy to be affected by any of these foolish little things wherewith
the others wanted to while away the time--the brief, dear time left
her to be in _his_ neighborhood!  Yet she smiled and agreed, and they
all thought her charming, and went on making their plans.

They made out their list of men who were to be invited.  She heard
the names read, and took no account of whom they had selected for her
escort.  What did it matter?  _His_ name was not among them!  She
heard their talk about their horses.

"Robin Hood has gone lame," declared one maiden pettishly, "isn't
that a shame?  Father says it's my fault, but I know better.  He's
going to get me a new horse pretty soon when he can find one to suit
him.  I know just the one I want, coal-black and shines like satin.
He can go like the wind and take a river as if he had wings.  I'm
dead in love with him.  I'm just dying to ride him, but his owner
won't sell him.  Isn't that mean?  He belongs to Jasper Holt.  Father
has offered him a fabulous price, but he won't sell him at any price,
he says.  I think he's perfectly horrid.  Of course he only does it
just to be disagreeable because he thinks I want him.  That man makes
me tired!"

There was a soft color on Jean's cheeks and she looked up as if a
challenge to defend her friend had been flung to her.

"Perhaps he's fond of the horse," she said gently, as she glanced
around on all those scornful young faces.

"He, fond of anything!  Oh my dear!  You don't know him!" declared
one of the girls.

"He never was fond of anything in his life," laughed another.  "Why,
he's the cruellest thing!  You don't know, Jean."

"Men grow very fond of horses," said Jean, holding her head high and
the roses in her cheeks deepening, "and their horses grow fond of
them.  A horse loves one who is kind to him."

She was remembering the proud arch of Jasper Holt's black as he rode
beside her in the woods but a short half hour before.

Her words were met by a shout of merriment, and a boisterous young
voice with a sneer in it pierced above the laughter:

"Kind to them!  Jasper Holt was never kind to anything in his life!
My dear, you simply don't know him!"

"But I _do_ know him!" said Jean now, rising from her rocker and
standing slim and straight against the vine-covered pillar of the
porch.  "I know him better than you all, and I know he is kind.  He
was kind and splendid to me!  No man could have done more!  I am
sorry you feel that way about him.  It isn't right!  He is my friend!"

She had spoken!  She had always meant to, ever since she came; but
there had been little opportunity without being deliberately
disagreeable and dragging the subject in.  Perhaps Eleanor had warned
her callers not to mention Jasper Holt, for they usually seemed to
avoid speaking of him; but she had always felt the time would come
when she could speak and let them all know what she thought about
him, and now it had come and she had spoken.  Her heart beat wildly,
her cheeks were rosy red, and her eyes shining starrily, but she
stood unabashed and faced them all.

A sudden silence fell upon the little group and they exchanged
furtive glances of understanding as if a mutual agreement sealed
their lips to things that they might say if she were not with them.

"Oh, well, of course you're grateful," said one girl in a
conciliatory tone.  "One couldn't help being grateful under such
circumstances; but he would have been a brute not to have pulled you
out of the water and showed you the way to Hawk Valley."

"Perhaps he wants his black to ride in the tournament," said another
girl mischievously, hoping to lift the cloud that had fallen over
them all.  "He has audacity enough for anything, though he has never
seemed to care for anything going on in the town.  Of course he has
never been encouraged to have."

"He wouldn't dare!" said another with flashing eyes.

"Why wouldn't he dare?" asked Jean, turning steady eyes to the
haughty young speaker.

"Because it wouldn't be tolerated," declared the girl still haughtily.

"I have seen him dare greater things than that," said Jean with a
far-away look in her eyes and something like a smile on her lips.

The girls looked at her a minute in silence and wonder, interchanged
quick glances that said: "She does not know," and changed the
subject.  They liked Jean too well, and she was too popular among the
men for them to risk angering her, so they chattered on about what
they would have in the lunch boxes, and who should bring what; but
Jean, with that far-away look in her eyes and that half smile on her
lips, as if she knew things that were hidden from others, said no
more.

They chattered and giggled and chorused to the end of their subject
and their time at last, and took themselves away; but it was the
dinner hour and Harrington was coming up the walk with two men who
were to be their guests for dinner.  There was just time for Jean to
change her riding habit for a dinner dress and hurry down again, no
chance for the rest and the quiet thoughts that cried out to have
their way.

The evening was filled with callers, as every evening had been since
she came that was not actually taken up by some entertainment or
invitation.  It seemed a wearisome time to Jean, who longed for her
quiet room and her own thoughts.  She watched the men who were
talking to her, trying to please her; saw that they were good to look
upon, cultured, and refined: saw that any one of them would be a good
friend to her if she would let him; and yet, when she considered it,
there was not one who came up to the standard of the man who had
saved her life.  She tried to look at the matter from their
standpoint and understand why it was that she could not like any of
them as she liked him; why they all seemed rather tedious in their
intercourse and tiresome in their coming; and the great thought came
down upon her that it was because she had first known him, and he was
so much larger and finer a man in every way than they.

She had no more thought than at the beginning that she would ever see
more of Holt.  The future showed no bright hope that they might come
together.  He had said it would not do, and she trusted him.
Whatever he willed concerning their friendship she bowed to, for she
trusted him utterly; but there was something vivid and both strong
and gentle in him that made all others vapid beside him.

She roused herself to be pleasant and entertaining, but her heart was
not in it.  Her sister, noticing as the evening went on that she
looked white and tired, finally managed to send their guests away.
And indeed, there had been moments when all the gaiety and laughter
seemed far away to her, and she had only seen the evil face of
Scathlin and heard his voice demanding the paper and threatening to
find it for himself.  Once she had shuddered and shivered visibly as
if she were chilly, and the Captain hastened to pick up a gauze scarf
and throw it around her shoulders, while Freeman Thorne pulled down
the window.

But when they were all gone Eleanor was not at peace about her sister
and in pretty negligee she came in presently to perch upon the bed
and question her.

"Is anything troubling you, Jean?" she asked anxiously.  "You seemed
so white and tired to-night?"

"Nothing at all, dearest," said Jean brightly.  "What a big
responsibility I am to you, you precious big sister!  You mustn't
worry about me, I have had a lovely visit.  But I get a little tired
of talking to so many people sometimes, and having to say the same
things over to all those men."

"You queer child!" said her sister, looking at her curiously.
"Almost any girl would be proud, to have so many admirers and you
take them as a matter of course and don't seem to care a bit for any
of them."

She studied the fair face of the girl keenly for any trace of
self-consciousness, but Jean's smile was as placid as ever.

"They are all nice, Eleanor," said the girl wearily, "but they do
grow a little tiresome; all day long some of them, and every day.  I
wouldn't mind if you and I had a day or two now and then just all to
ourselves."

"Well, you certainly are hopeless!" said her sister.  "Tell me,
child, is there someone at home to whom you have given your heart?"

"Oh, no!" said Jean quickly, laughing at the thought.  "Who would
there be?  You know all the boys, and there isn't one I could care
for."

"Well, I didn't know but that new bank cashier--"

"Tom Lloyd?  Why he's engaged to Bella Harkness.  Did no one tell
you?  Besides, he's years older than I am."

"Well, there's that oldest Shafton boy.  Mother wrote he had come
home from college and started in business.  They are a good family,
Jean."

"Jimmy Shafton?  Oh, Eleanor!  You ought to see him!  He's the
biggest snob!  But there!  I suppose he's nice enough, but I don't
like him, that's all.  He has a weak chin, and somehow I don't trust
him.  Now, Eleanor, you funny little match-maker, just give me up as
a hopeless case.  You can't marry me off yet awhile and you'll have
to make up your mind to it.  I'm going home where I belong to take
care of my mother and teach my Sunday School class; but I've had a
glorious time while I was here and I shall enjoy thinking it over a
lot when I get home."

Eleanor was baffled, but persistent.

"Don't you like the Captain?" she asked.

"Yes, a lot.  He's going to take me a ride through the canyon
to-morrow.  Will you go along?  He promised to ask you."

"Well, probably he didn't want me," said Eleanor significantly.

"Well, _I_ do," said Jean decidedly.  "I told him I wouldn't go
without you."

"Why, yes, I suppose I could take Betty on her pony."

"Do," said Jean, "I love to ride with Betty, and then you can talk to
the Captain when I get tired."

"You funny little girl!  Well, don't you like Freeman Thorne?"

"Of course," said Jean.  "He's going to bring me some Indian
arrow-heads to give to my boys at home."

Eleanor sat back and surveyed her inscrutable little sister
hopelessly.  There was one more question she wanted to ask, but
somehow she didn't dare, because she hated to see that look of hurt
dignity come into Jean's eyes whenever she spoke of Jasper Holt; but
there lingered in her heart just a little uneasiness about the
handsome outlaw whose part the girl had so loyally taken on her
arrival, and about whom her lips had remained so significantly sealed
ever since.  Yet, despite her uneasiness, she went to her room with
the question unasked, and Jean locked her door and turned out her
light with a sigh of relief that at last she was alone.

Down on her knees beside the open window she knelt, her arms on the
window seat, her face raised to the eternal stars.  There was a kind
of triumph in her face, for though she knew that great sadness was
coming rapidly on its way, yet over all the excitement of the day,
the terror of peril and escape, there was a great exultation.  For
just this one night at least she must exult in the thought of her
lover and his second saving of her life; she must rejoice in his love
and the fact that she could trust him.  Memory brought back now in a
flood of joy every glance of his true eyes, every word and gesture,
every movement and attitude of the perfect body.  He seemed so much
stronger and finer and nobler in every way than all those others.
What a pity that he must rest under their disapproval.  How dreadful
that they could not know him as he really was--that she must
presently go on her lonely way home, and see no more of him, know no
more of him--perhaps never on this earth again.  He had it in him to
be true to this terrible separation because he thought it ought to
be, and she was proud of him for it, but her heart already ached in
anticipation of the sorrow that was in store for her.

With a sob she put her head down on the window sill and prayed softly:

"Dear God, take care of him, and help people to know him.  Help him
to be true always and let others find it out and be ashamed of the
way they have treated him.  Bless him, and keep him--my dear friend!"

Then with one lingering look away to where the stars shone quietly
above his dwelling as above hers, she went to her sleep.




CHAPTER XVI

The tournament was set for the day before Jean started home.

It was to be a great event, the biggest thing the town of Hawk Valley
could devise in the way of entertainment for its most honored guests.
It was an all-day affair, with contests and games of every kind,
races and matches and a big procession with everyone wearing the
gayest and most fantastic garments the resources of the town afforded.

The climax of the program was to be late in the afternoon when the
great feats of riding were performed and the prizes and wreaths given
out to the victors.

The highest honor had been allotted to Jean, for she had been
selected to give out the prizes and crown the victor of the final
riding contest.

It had been the custom heretofore in other similar contests that a
lady so honored should ride once around the running track in company
with the victor and share with him the triumph of the occasion.
Great was the eagerness of all the young men to win this privilege on
this occasion, for Jean's delicate beauty and sweet, gentle ways had
made her most popular, and everyone was striving for the privilege of
riding with her and being crowned by her fair hand.  All in a
friendly way there had been much merriment about it, much betting and
chaffing, much practising of horsemanship, much boasting, and many a
gallant gentleman had besought her to wear his flowers on the gala
day that he might stand the better chance of winning.

But Jean had smiled upon them all and would promise none.  She took
it all as a beautiful piece of pleasantry in her honor, though
sometimes she was secretly distressed at the earnestness with which
many of her admirers pressed their suit.  They were splendid fellows,
all of them, and it was hard to be refusing and disappointing them
all the time.  Hard, too, it was, to disappoint her sister Eleanor
continually, who was an enthusiastic match-maker and felt real
chagrin that her beloved sister should go back home from all that
adulation still apparently heart-free, when she had been given so
many perfectly good chances to fall in love.  Eleanor would have
liked nothing better than to have Jean marry and settle out near
herself.  Then the father and mother would eventually come, of
course, and the family would be reunited.  It was most aggravating to
her that Jean remained so unimpressionable.

The day before the tournament great boxes of flowers began to arrive
for Jean, embarrassing her with their riches, profusion and
costliness.  Orchids and lilies, gardenias and roses of rare
varieties, carnations, jessamine, even delicate wild flowers and
wonderful poppies.  Each admirer had spent much thought and care upon
his offering, hoping to have it chosen for wearing upon the great
occasion; and each had tried to have his flowers unusual and
noticeable enough to draw her choice away from all others.  With each
great box came card or note or sometimes letter bearing the name and
earnest plea of the giver, three even offering themselves with their
flowers.

Jean stood among her blossoms, her cheeks vying with the roses, her
eyes as starry as the lilies, distressed and touched, but not quite
pleased.  It was terrible to her that she seemed to have wrought such
havoc in the hearts of men.

Eleanor and the children hovered excitedly around, far more pleased
than Jean over the honors that were heaped upon her.  Eleanor talked
in a high, sweet soprano about the merits of the different flowers,
and the reasons why each should be worn in preference to the others.

"There were the Captain's orchids--so expensive, poor fellow--and he
was so handsome!"  Eleanor always ended with the Captain where she
had begun.  It was plain that Eleanor favored the Captain most
mightily.

Jean stood and touched the flowers, tenderly, compassionately, as
though in some way they were human things that had been cheated into
coming without a cause; as she might have looked at and touched
something very beautiful that did not belong to her.  It seemed a big
responsibility to have all these lovely blossoms with all they
represented, and as she filled each vase and jar and bowl to
overflowing till almost every available receptacle in the house was
filled, her eyes grew more and more troubled and thoughtful.  Somehow
it seemed wrong for her to have all these perishing beauties, knowing
that the lasting treasure they were here to plead for their donors
was not hers to give.

"Which flowers are you going to wear, Jean?" asked Eleanor vexedly
that night, as they went upstairs together after tucking the blossoms
all away under damp papers.  "You know you'll have to decide in the
morning, and there really aren't any more to come in, unless Mr.
Frazer sends some.  Everybody, literally every man in the region that
could have a shadow of right to do so, has sent you some.  It shows
how popular you are!  I don't believe any girl that ever came here
before was so well treated, and so universally admired.  It's
wonderful, Jean.  You little, quiet, sweet child, but you've got them
all under your small thumb!  I never would have suspected it of you."

Jean smiled wearily.  She was tired and her sister's idea of triumph
was not hers.  It savored too much of counting the scalps of those
she had slain.  She did not want to have men at her feet to be turned
away.  She looked at life more seriously than just a game where she
was to win all no matter who lost.

She turned away with a gentle good-night, and Eleanor's eyes followed
her dissatisfiedly.

"You know, you might wear one of each and satisfy them all," she
suggested.

Jean smiled and shuddered inwardly.  The scalps again!  A display of
them!

"Never!" she murmured.

"Well, what are you going to do?"  Her sister was all out of patience
with her dallying.

"I'll sleep over it," she said brightly.  "Aren't you tired, dear?"

And Eleanor had to let it go at that.

Young Frazer sent his flowers in the morning: wonderful violets, blue
as the sky over Hawk Valley; dewy and sweet, and raised with careful
tending; and there were more roses from several men at a distance who
had not been reckoned upon.  But Eleanor was not told of the roses
that the servant found upon the doorstep when he went to sweep the
piazza, early in the morning; the roses with the dew upon them and
the golden ruby glow of sunset in their hearts.  They were not
wrapped, or in a box, or accompanied by a card; nor was there even
any name upon them.  They simply lay upon the doorstep and made their
mute appeal of fragrance; and the man servant, who, like all the
other men in Hawk Valley, servant though he was, had surrendered to
the gentle, beautiful girl, understood and carried them straight up
to her door without telling anyone.  He knew from whom they came, and
he knew, by the starry look in her eyes when the others like them had
come, that she would know.

She gathered them into her willing arms and thanked him.  Her problem
was solved, and she could go down to breakfast with a light heart.

"Have you decided which flowers to wear, Jean?" her sister asked
sharply the minute she came into the room.

"Yes," said the girl with a smile, "but it's a secret.  I'm not going
to tell.  You will see when I wear them."

Eleanor looked anxiously at the bright face with the firm lips, and
the decided set of the pretty head, and sighed.  She knew she would
have to wait.

Jean was to go on her pony to the scene of the day's festivities,
that she might be ready for the triumphal ride at the end; and the
Captain had begged the privilege of accompanying her, being confident
that he should both see his costly orchids adorning her, and win the
right to ride home by her side, triumphant.  It seemed to him that in
that case it would be but a short way to the other heights he hoped
to attain.

He arrived at the house on the minute appointed, but Jean, usually
punctual, kept him waiting.  The Harringtons were all packed
comfortably in their motor-car.  They kept calling impatiently.

"We'll be late, Jean, and James has to see about the signals and put
up some more ribbons.  You know he's marshal of the day."

"Go on," called Jean sweetly from her window, "I'm just fastening on
my flowers.  I'll be there in a minute.  Don't wait, we'll catch you."

They heard her footsteps flying down the stairs and Harrington
started the car.

"Wait, James, I must see what flowers she chose."

"Nonsense!" said her husband, sending the car shooting forward at a
pace.  "You can wait till she gets there.  What difference does it
make anyway?"

"Why, if she doesn't take the right ones I can send her back," said
Eleanor, twisting her neck to see her sister, who was just mounting
her pony.

"The right ones?  You don't know which ones you want her to wear
yourself; you've said so a dozen times this morning," laughed her
husband, jeeringly.

"Well, I know, but there are some quite impossible ones, you know,
and Jean is so queer and unconventional.  It would be just like her
to wear John Beard's poppies because she felt sorry for him on
account of his lameness.  She always was that way.  Mamma let her
choose a canary when she was little, and she chose a poor, little
faded thing that wouldn't sing a note, because she said it wasn't
pretty like the others and would enjoy a nice cage."

"Well, I guess you'll have to let her choose her own husband, anyway.
She's got to live with him, and she's got a big will of her own."

"I know," said Eleanor, sighing.  "I shall be relieved when she gets
safely married.  Mamma is so shut in that she doesn't realize how
unworldly Jean is.  But, James, I do wish you'd slow up a little.  I
must see those flowers.  Betty, dear, can you tell what they are Aunt
Jean is wearing?"

The little girl craned her neck.

"I think they're just roses, mamma," said Betty indifferently.

"Roses?  Are you sure, child?  Aren't they orchids?  The poor
Captain!  But there were multitudes of roses.  I wonder whose they
are."

They had turned into the main street, now.  Banners were flying and a
band playing martial music.  The question of the flowers must
perforce become a side issue, for there were numberless little things
to be decided, and Mrs. Harrington was consulted many times before
she finally mounted the grand stand and took her seat among the
prominent people of the place, looking around with satisfaction to
see Jean ascending the steps followed by the handsome captain, whose
dejected face still showed his disappointment about the orchids.  For
the moment she was too much taken up with the captain to look closely
at the wonderful roses that Jean wore; then suddenly she turned her
attention to them.  Where had she seen roses like those?  Who could
have sent them?

Then memory leaped on duty.  Roses yellow as gold and with a heart of
ruby!  Holt's Golden Sunset!  She could hear her husband's sharp
voice repeating the hateful name.  Could it be possible that he had
had the audacity to send Jean roses on this day, when all eyes would
be turned to the girl?  And Jean, knowing how they felt about him,
had dared to wear them!

Her cheeks grew red and her eyes flashed.  She looked daggers at the
girl, and then, realizing that the captain could see her, tried to
control her face; and even now Jean was moving away to the seat on
the right, the seat of honor for the lady who was to present the
prizes.

"Jean, wait!  I must speak to you," she called.  Jean, two chairs
away, leaned over, smiling.  Perhaps she knew what was coming, but
her lips had that firm little twist as she said: "What is it?" that
indicated courage to stick to a decision.

Eleanor Harrington leaned over the two chairs, speaking low and
vehemently:

"Jean, take those flowers off and give them to me at once!  I'll send
the man back for the orchids.  People will just think you have
forgotten your flowers.  Quick, give them to me."

Jean drew back with pretty dignity, and laid her hand protectingly
over the flowers at her waist:

"I'm sorry, Eleanor," she said gently and decidedly.  "I can't do
what you ask.  These are the flowers I intend to wear.  Captain
Wetherill understands me perfectly.  I told him beforehand not to
send me flowers."

And she turned away.

"But, Jean," cried her sister frantically, "you simply must not wear
those roses!  Send the man back for any others, but don't wear those.
You don't understand!  Everybody will know those are Jasper Holt's
roses.  People will think it very strange.  Why, he isn't even here.
It isn't respectable for you to have anything to do with him."

Jean looked her sister straight in the eyes.

"I understand perfectly, Eleanor," she said softly, for a group of
people were coming in and taking possession of the seats around them.
"I cannot and will not wear any of those other flowers."

"Then take them off entirely and don't wear any," said Eleanor, the
vexed tears coming into her eyes.

"I'm sorry, Eleanor, but I must wear them," said Jean, and went
quietly, almost sadly to her seat.  She hated to hurt her sister, and
to seem to do violence to her wishes, but the wearing of these
flowers had become a thing of moment to her, a sacred duty and
privilege.  She knew that to Holt, if he should see her, it would be
a symbol of her trust in him.  If he did not come to the tournament
at least she would have the satisfaction of knowing in her own heart
that she had been loyal to him, in the only way vouchsafed her, that
of wearing his flowers before them all.

Eleanor settled back, defeated, in her chair, two red spots glowing
on her cheeks, and angry flashes in her eyes.  She was mortified
beyond expression.  That her young sister, who had the adulation of
the whole county poured at her feet, should choose, before the
assembled multitude, to wear the favor of a man whom nobody
recognized or favored filled her socially-aspiring soul with rage.
What would James say when he found her sister had been wearing his
enemy's flowers?  Well, it was all James' fault anyway, for if he had
kept the car waiting a minute she would have discovered Jean's folly
in time to stop it.  If she had seen those yellow roses glowing on
her sister's gown before she mounted her pony they would never have
come to the tournament, no, not if she had to detain Jean forcibly at
home for the day and tell people she was taken suddenly ill!  This
came of bringing the girl up in a purely domestic and religious
atmosphere and not teaching her a little worldly wisdom.  Well, she
would tell James it was his fault; that would be some satisfaction.
Yes, and she would tell Jean just what she thought of her headstrong
folly, too, when she got her home.

The waves of angry color had not yet ceased to flow over Eleanor's
handsome face when the Thornes bustled in and took the next seats.
Mrs. Thorne was a large, imposing person and had much to say of her
son's admiration for Jean.  She purred eagerly about the girl's
beauty:

"So simple and sweet in that white dress with those beautiful yellow
roses!  Freeman wouldn't tell me what flowers the sent her.  I wonder
if they can be his.  I never saw any like them around here, did you?
The boy is completely gone about her.  I suspect he spent a fabulous
sum on flowers.  He sent to Kansas City for them."

It was then that Eleanor began to take heart of hope.  If Mrs. Thorne
didn't know whose roses Jean wore perhaps the other women wouldn't.
Women didn't visit Jasper Holt's home, and men didn't notice those
things much.

She settled back relieved, and allowed herself to think how well Jean
was looking and how devoted the Captain seemed in spite of his floral
setback.  Perhaps, after all, he would only be the more keen that
Jean was not in a hurry to land him.  Was she, after all, a little
deeper than they thought and did she plan her campaign with a view to
making her admirers all the more eager?  Eleanor Harrington never had
been able to comprehend a nature higher than her own.




CHAPTER XVII

Into the midst of Eleanor's troubled thoughts came the herald, a boy
from a neighboring ranch, fantastically attired, who rode on a white
pony with fluttering blue ribbons for reins, and blew three sharp
blasts on a silver bugle, the signal for the opening of the sports.
Eleanor Harrington whispered a few words to Betty, and helped her to
slip quietly out of the seat into the aisle, then settled back
relieved.  She had sent a message to Jean not for anything in the
world to tell any one whose flowers she wore, and Jean looked up and
smiled brightly across the heads of the people between them, nodding
her consent.  Betty came back to her seat, pleased to have been the
centre of all eyes for a moment, and her mother patted her hand and
reflected that, after all, it was wise in Jean not to wear any of her
special admirers' flowers, for then they could none of them be angry
with her; and if it should come out that she wore Holt's roses a
little judicious hint of "gratitude" and "a sense of duty toward one
who had saved her life" would only add charm to the lovely character
of the girl.  As Holt was not present what harm could come of it?

The day's sports went forward briskly.  Each feature of the program
had been put into separate and capable hands, and each vied with the
other to make his or her stunt the best of all.  There were
children's games, marches and dances.  There were folk dances,
speeches, contests, and races of all sorts, each highly entertaining
in its way; and there was the great picnic dinner when the entire
company adjourned to the edge of the woods where tables had been
prepared and where the good things of the town had been set forth to
tempt the appetite.  Everybody was hungry and everybody laughed and
talked gaily.

Eleanor had had a vague hope that she might induce Jean to send home
at noon for some other flowers on the plea that the ones she wore
were faded, but Jean was surrounded by a company of gay young people
and there really was no opportunity to speak to her.  Harrington,
too, who might have taken the matter in hand and convinced Jean of
the error of her ways, had been summoned to the grounds to perfect
some arrangement for the afternoon, so there was nothing to be done.

When the bugle blew for the afternoon program to begin Harrington was
beside his wife, his work done, ready to enjoy the best part of
things without any more responsibility.  But Eleanor, knowing well
his moods, thought it unwise to tell him about the flowers for the
present.  It was too late now to change, and James would simply be
furious; it was best to save that stroke about its being his fault
until another time when she needed to convince him of something else.

The children had finished their entertainment in the morning, and the
remainder of the program was to be by the men.

When the first set of riders came out in line there was one among
their number whom the crowd did not at first recognize; a man with
bright, curly hair and fine bearing, dressed in white flannels and
riding a jet black, long-limbed horse.  Everywhere among the seats
could be heard the murmur: "Who is he?" but no one answered.

Harrington raised his field glass and looked; then dropped his hand
with an exclamation of dismay.  Eleanor, watching her husband's face,
reached for the glass, looked a moment, then she too dropped the
glass in her lap and gave her attention to controlling her
countenance.  No one must suspect what a bitter drop in the day's cup
of pleasure this was to them.

Harrington sat, grimly reflecting that he might have prevented this
possibility if he had framed the entrance qualifications aright; but
Holt had been away indefinitely when the tournament was planned and
he had not thought of him.  Now it was too late to do a thing; and
there were reasons that made it unwise for him to show displeasure or
unfriendliness to Holt, lest suspicion of a worse character fall upon
himself.

For the remainder of the afternoon life to Eleanor Harrington became
a matter of self-control.  Now and then she managed to glance
furtively at her husband and wonder why he hadn't flown into a rage;
but she was wise enough to say nothing, knowing that as he did not
there must be a reason.  Nevertheless she mentally resolved to give
her young sister such a piece of her mind on their return home as
would not easily be forgotten; and for the first time since the date
of Jean's early departure had been set, she was reconciled to it.
What made matters so very much worse was that Jasper Holt looked
distractingly handsome in those unaccustomed white flannels, wearing
them as though he had grown up in them, and sitting his mount like a
young god.  There wasn't a man of the whole line who seemed so
thoroughly a part of his horse as Holt, and every line of his head
and body, every controlled, easy movement that he made was beautiful.
Of course Jean was taken with his looks.  Girls were such fools; that
is, girls who had no worldly wisdom.

Up on the grandstand a group of girls looked and exclaimed and
whispered eagerly together: "Do you suppose Jean knew all the time he
was going to enter?  Do you suppose maybe she's in love with him?
_Really?_  Wouldn't that be exciting?  But of course it couldn't ever
amount to anything but a little romance!  And she looks so innocent!
I don't believe she knew, after all."  And so they speculated.

Jean had known him the first moment he appeared upon the scene and
her heart stood still, as if this were the moment for which she had
waited all her life.  He was here, and how splendid he looked!  The
rough flannel shirt and corduroys in which she was accustomed to see
him were becoming, but he fairly took her breath away in his new
costume.  There wasn't a man among them, no matter what he wore, who
could match him for looks.  Her heart swelled with joy beneath his
roses.  This was her little moment to rejoice.  To-morrow she was
going away, and she might not see him any more, but to-day it was
right that she should have this beautiful sight of him to carry away
with her.  So she watched, her eyes shining and her cheeks glowing
warmly.

There was no question at any time but that he was the rider of them
all.  His horse skimmed the hurdles as though they had been mere
imaginary lines, and flew over the highest bar like a swallow in the
air.  He sat the black creature with ease and grace, and from the
start all eyes were following his every move.  The crowd forgot for
the time its prejudice and animosity, and sat in absorbed admiration
of his skill and courage.

They all knew him as a daring rider, for often women held their
breath to see him go tearing through the street on some wild beast of
a horse whose mad flight seemed uncanny; but the incomparable riding
he did now was beyond all he had ever done for them before.  They
watched and glowed and applauded, and the heart of the girl he loved
swelled with pride so that the tears of joy came into her eyes and
blinded her from seeing him.  She was glad that everyone was watching
him, and no one would be looking at her.  She did not know that her
sister had the field glass focussed straight upon her, and was
studying her closely.  Alas, for the tears that were so hastily
brushed away.  Eleanor looked and her heart sank in dismay, poor,
troubled lady.  She began to rejoice that Jean was going on the
morrow; in fact, the afternoon could not come too soon to a close for
her now.

The final race, the hardest of them all, intricate and amazing in its
plan and wonderful in its working out, in which the obstacles were
many and the skill required was great, was at its climax.  Holt had
kept easily abreast, often ahead of all the others, and the next to
the last round was almost finished.  People leaned forward in their
seats, then rose upon their feet, shouting and cheering and waving
their hands.  Jean, with the others, leaned over the front rail of
the grandstand, in the centre of the judges' bench waving her
handkerchief excitedly; the bit of sheer linen slipped from her
trembling fingers and fluttered to the ground.  Quick as a flash Holt
spurred ahead and wheeling in a circle in front of the judges' stand,
swinging his body lithely he leaned and picked up the bit of linen
from the ground, wheeled shortly again and handed it to its owner.
Then he was off like a flash down the track on the last round but a
quarter of the way behind the rest, his wonderful advantage lost!

"Oh-hh-hhh!" went up in dismay from a hundred throats; and "Ah-hh-h!"
in appreciation.  It was a pretty bit of gallantry; a skilful trick
of horsemanship, but, oh, the pity of it, to lose the race for a
handkerchief!  The crowd could hardly forgive him.  Who cared about
all the rest?  They were but secondary now even though he had fallen
behind.  What madness and folly when the handkerchief could have
waited, or was he doing it to be smart?  The crowd were angry at
their sudden loss, and began to think how just like Jasper Holt it
was to trifle with them so, when suddenly they sat up and took
notice.  Was the race lost after all?  Jasper Holt had passed the
last two riders and was running neck and neck with the third, and now
he passed the fourth from the end.  There were but two more to pass.
Still, the others were nearly to the three-quarter line, and the
foremost was Captain Wetherill with his powerful roan mare.  He was
riding hard and meant to win.  There was a bitter, haughty look upon
his face.  His triumph would be spoiled by all that gallery play that
had preceded it, though it was plain he felt the victory easy now.
Would Holt attempt to pass him?  It seemed impossible, yet on he
came, his black skimming like a swallow on the outside of the ring,
gaining, gaining, every second, and the rider with his easy,
nonchalant air, sitting as if the winning were a matter of
indifference to him.  The crowd stood up and shouted now, a deafening
din, and Jean stood with them, holding her breath in wonder and
excitement.  The man who rode second was but a few paces ahead when
his horse suddenly swerved outward, staggered and fell, carrying the
rider down with him straight in the track of Holt, coming on at his
terrible pace.

The shouting hushed in tightening throats as the crowd waited for the
terrible catastrophe that seemed inevitable.  Then, before they were
fully aware of the danger, the black horse had leaped over the sudden
obstacle, and was racing neck and neck with the Captain's horse and
gaining every step.

Only fifty yards remained to be run.

Breathlessly the crowd stood and watched as the two leaders sped
forward.  Would he make it?  Would it be possible after all the
hindrances for mortal rider to compass that?

The Captain was on his mettle now, spurring his horse to its utmost,
but still the black kept easily with him.  Like two motes in the
sunshine set to swim in unison the racers looked to the excited crowd
as they skimmed along together.

Jean clutched the rail in front of her, her eyes blinded once more by
sudden tears of excitement, her heart thumping wildly till it seemed
as if all those about her must hear it.

Suddenly, incredibly, the black seemed to take on new speed!

A gasp from the crowd, a breath of satisfaction, and then through her
tears Jean saw the black leap ahead of his rival and clear the line
with a lead of fully ten feet!




CHAPTER XVIII

For a moment there was silence, as if the crowd could not grasp the
import of the amazing feat it witnessed; as if senses had not yet
registered results in human brains.  Then a great shout arose,
gathering force as it swept along.  They stamped, they cheered, they
yelled, they waved wild, excited hands with handkerchiefs, umbrellas,
canes, anything that was in them.  They went mad and prolonged the
sound until it was deafening.  And there did not seem to be one in
that whole crowd who remembered that the man for whom they were
shouting had been for years despised by them all.

No one noticed Jean, with her face wreathed in smiles, sparkling with
tears, and her heart beating wildly with joy.  She stood on her
railed platform, one hand upon her breast to still its excitement,
the other hand wiping away her foolish tears which she hoped to get
rid of before anybody had time to notice them.  It was all so
wonderful, so beautiful to her to have her lover recognized in this
way.  To be sure, it was only an athletic feat, no recognition of his
sterling worth the crowd were giving him in this ovation.  She was
not deceived.  She knew it did not mean any change of their
relations; no difference in the circumstances that divided them; but
it was something great and beautiful to her to have even his riding
recognized thus enthusiastically.

The cheering continued in round after round for several minutes.

Holt had dismounted, halting his horse for a moment, and stood facing
the shouting mob, reluctant, yet as if it were something that had to
be performed in order to stop their noise.  Then with a slight,
dignified bow he turned away, and walked toward the fallen rider.

Already a doctor had been called and a crowd was gathering.  Holt
dispersed them with a wave of his hand, and kneeling beside the
injured man, began ministering to him with skilful, tender hand,
regardless of the shouting of the throng who cheered this new action
yet more madly.

A delegation came in hot haste to bring the hero to the judges' stand
where Jean, with shining eyes and excited, happy face, stood waiting
with the wreath in her hand to crown him, but he paid not the
slightest attention to them.  Instead he raised a silver whistle to
his lips and blew a keen, sweet blast, that even in their excitement
startled the crowd and made them remember the tales connected with
that whistle and the deeds it had summoned men to do.

Two men jumped down instantly from the front seat of the grandstand
and were at his side before the echo of the whistle had died away.
Jean saw them and knew them for the men who had ridden out of the
woods the day that Scathlin attacked her.  They were his special
bodyguard, his faithful, tried and true.  He sent them off with a
word, and in a moment they were back with a hastily improvised
stretcher and, lifting the injured man from the ground, bore him away
to the tent that had been set up for the use of the ladies.  Holt
would have followed but for the detaining committee, who laid hands
upon him now and insisted eagerly, compellingly, that he was holding
up the whole performance and he had no right to spoil the day and
keep the lady waiting.  Even then Holt might have resisted had they
not made mention of the lady, and he looked up and caught her eye and
wistful smile--for he had no mind to be further in the public eye--he
had ridden for Jean, but he wanted not their favors.  He took off his
hat to her and came forward, and the action touched off the crowd
again into a hoarser cry of excitement than before.  Someone, madder
than the rest, even ventured to bring his name into the cry: "Holt!
Holt!  Holt!  _Hurrah!_"

Holt lifted up his head proudly at that and went forward, not as a
man goes who is ashamed before his fellow men.  His bearing was of
one who dares to face others, a "gentleman, unafraid."  The shout
died down in hushed surprise, and then rose on a higher wave that had
in it something of the honor and respect his bearing had demanded.
And so he came and knelt before her.

In all that wild, excited company only Eleanor Harrington sat unmoved.

"What are they shouting again for?" she asked her husband
impatiently.  "Isn't this thing almost over?  I'm tired."

"They are calling Holt to come to the stand and receive the prize,"
said Harrington, under his breath, as if it were a bitter thing for
him to see.

"How annoying!" said Eleanor, rising to look.  "And I suppose Jean
will have to present it.  If I had foreseen any such thing as this I
would have forbidden her to take such a prominent position.  I think
they have made altogether too much fuss over that creature already.
It was an _impertinence_ in him to come to-day and he knew it.  He
oughtn't to be encouraged.  I wonder you didn't take steps to have
him put out at the start, James.  But, James!  There is one thing,
Jean _must not_ ride around the track with him!  I simply _will not
have it_!  You must go down there quickly and tell her not to.
_Forbid_ it!  Tell her to say she is sick or anything, only she must
not ride with him.  Quick!  Go, James! or it will be too late!  She
won't have sense enough herself.  It will be just like her to think
she must, she is so afraid of hurting people's feelings.  See, she is
standing up with the wreath in her hands.  Why don't you go?"

"Hush!" said Harrington, drawing his wife down into her seat again
and speaking in a low tone: "Hush!  Somebody will hear you.  Don't
you see she's got to go now?  Don't you understand that public
opinion will demand it?  She'd be a fool to turn back now, she must
go the whole show.  Besides, I can't afford to get his ill-will, and
if she didn't go with him Holt would know I had prevented her."

"You can't _afford_!" said his wife angrily.  "You can't afford!" and
she raised her voice in astonishment and dismay.  "What do you mean?
I thought you told me only a few days ago that you had him where he
couldn't do you any more harm?"

"Hush, Eleanor, haven't you any sense at all?  This is no place to
discuss business matters.  Don't say another word.  Things have
changed.  I had a message from Scathlin.  It's all up!  Don't mention
the matter to Jean, let her ride with him if she likes.  I've got to
make friends with him somehow or I'm in a bad hole."

Eleanor's face would have been a sight for the neighbors if they had
not been too busy shouting to notice.

"Well, I think things have come to a pretty pass if my sister's
reputation has to be sacrificed for business," she retorted.

The white, furious look her husband gave her silenced her, however,
and she sat back struggling to master her own feelings and understand
what her husband had meant.

Dazed and indignant she beheld what was going on at the judges' stand.

Jasper Holt was kneeling almost reverently before the girl whom he
had twice saved from death, his bright head bowed, and she, with her
eyes all starry bright and a little pink flush stealing into her
cheeks, bent and laid the laurel wreath upon his brow.

The crowd hushed its sound while the little ceremony was performed
and then shouted aloud again, while Jasper Holt arose and, gracefully
as any of the gentlemen assembled could have done it, helped the lady
down the steps and to her saddle; then mounting rode beside her,
bowing gravely to right and left where were drawn up in line those
other contestants over whom he had won his so-great victory.  These,
in spite of their chagrin, were bowing and smiling graciously, for
they would not have the lady know how bitter was their defeat; and so
together rode the two, silently, amid the storm of cheers, out into
the arena and around the track.

Holt did not presume upon the occasion nor his position to show his
intimacy with the girl beside him.  Instead he rode with respectful
mien, save for one grave, understanding smile at the start, by which
she knew how much he hated all this publicity and would have slipped
away without it but for her sake.  As if their every word and look
could have been heard in all that din, they rode with downcast eyes
and silent lips, and there was nothing in the whole journey around
the course that could in the least offend the watching, anxious,
mortified sister.

Not until they were almost back to the judges' stand did Holt attempt
to even glance her way, and then he spoke quite low:

"You are going on the morning train?"

She bowed assent because she could not speak.  A rush of tears was in
her throat at thought of leaving.

"I shall see you again to say good-bye," he said, and gave her one
look and smile that filled her heart joy.  Then he left her at the
judges' stand with a low bow and rode out of the arena alone; a long,
appreciative shout following him out of sight.

Jean, her heart too full for words, watched him; then turned to face
her host of friends, who, making the best of their disappointment,
were clustering around her and saying pleasant things.

The madness of the crowd over the late hero was dying down even now
with his disappearance from the arena.  Habit and prejudice were
having sway once more.  Men laughed deprecatorily over their recent
frenzy and said: "Well that certainly was great riding.  It takes a
dare-devil to do the impossible.  Of course, we know Holt can ride;
still I didn't really think he could do as well as that."

By the time they were out on the street and back in their homes they
had recovered their sanity enough to agree with their wives that it
was a great piece of impudence for him to ride in and take all the
honors away from the men who had worked so hard to make the affair a
success.  Yet all in their hearts felt again the thrill of excitement
as they thought of those last fifty yards of the race, and secretly
rejoiced that, impudence or not, Holt had entered the lists.

"You poor little girl," gushed Mrs. Thorne over Jean.  "It certainly
was a shame that you couldn't have had a more respectable escort in
your ride around the track.  Of course he looked very well and all
that, I wasn't meaning his clothes; and he really behaved much better
than I would have expected for him, quite modest, getting out of the
way and not presuming at the end.  It was so much better than if he
had had to be asked to leave, you know, but still, it was a great
disappointment that some of your _friends_ couldn't have shared the
honor with you.  Freeman, I know, will be terribly down about not
winning."

"Thank you, Mrs. Thorne," said Jean sweetly, "I am sorry your son had
to be disappointed, but of course everyone couldn't win, although
they all did well, don't you think?  But, after all, you know Mr.
Holt _is_ one of my friends, in fact my first friend, because he
saved my life in the wreck when I was on my way here, and helped me
to get here.  I really felt it quite an honor to ride with him
to-day."

She turned pleasantly to greet the wife of one of the officers from
the Fort and left poor Mrs. Thorne to gasp and roll her eyes in
astonishment.  "Of course she doesn't know him; she doesn't
understand," said the poor woman in an aside to Eleanor who came up
just then.  "And perhaps it's just as well she shouldn't, as she's
going home so soon.  Poor Freeman!  I don't know what he'll do.  He's
completely gone over her!"

Then all those fluttering girls came around Jean and began to talk at
once.

"Oh, wasn't he simply great!  And isn't he handsome in those togs?
And isn't it a shame he has to be so wicked?  And such a woman hater?
I declare I thought he was going to refuse to ride around with you.
And, oh, Jean, you sly thing!  You knew he was going to enter when
you talked about it the other day, didn't you?"

They chattered and buzzed, and the young men came presently and bore
them away one at a time.  It was the Captain, patient and
persevering, who at last, by his very persistence, won the right to
ride back to the house by Jean's side.  Poor Captain, his last ride,
and that glorious smile in her eyes, but not for him!

She was gentle with him when he tried again to persuade her to accept
his love.  She told him with a wistful sigh that all happiness in
this world was not in getting what we wanted, but in knowing things
were real and true and fine.  She said she should always think of him
as her friend, and she hoped he would forget that he had wanted
anything else; and she thanked him for his beautiful orchids so
sweetly that she left a warm glow in his heart, notwithstanding his
double defeat.

Later, as she knelt before her window-seat and looked out into the
sweet starry night, and over toward the cottage where the Golden
Sunset roses grew, she forgot all the petty things that had been
bothering her all day, and just let herself be glad for a little
while.  Then she bowed her head and prayed: "Dear Father, I thank
Thee for letting them see so much.  Please, some day let them all
know him as he really is.  Bless him and keep him.  I trust him with
Thee, dear Lord."

And when she fell asleep at last weary with the long day and the
excitement, against her pillow under her cheek there lay soft cool
petals of the golden roses, and their fragrance mingled with her
dreams and brought a smile to her lips.




CHAPTER XIX.

The breath of the roses on her pillow and the fresh ones on the stand
near the bed wakened Jean softly in the early morning, and she lay
still, thinking joyously that she was to see Jasper once more before
she left.  She would have some word, some glance to carry with her on
the way.  She would have all the beautiful day that was past to put
with their other experience together and keep, and she would have
that good-bye.  It was the knowledge that he had promised to see her
again that brought the smile to her lips and the eternal hope of
youth to her eyes, when she remembered that this was her last day in
Hawk Valley, perhaps forever.

There were not many minutes for such happy thoughts.  Her trunk was
packed, save a few little things, but they must be put in; and the
children were already clamoring for her to come downstairs, they
could not spare her any longer on this, her last morning.

Before she was entirely ready to go down people began to come to the
house to say good-bye and attend her to the station, and when she was
finally ready she had gathered quite an escort so that her going
through the street seemed quite like a little triumphal procession, a
fit continuation of the festivities of the day before.

Eleanor was proud and pleased and weeping all in one, and there was
laughing and chatter and banter and many invitations for her to
return.

There had been more flowers sent this morning, and boxes of candy and
books for her to read on the way.  Just before she had left the house
Eleanor brought to her more orchids that the Captain had sent, and
begged her to wear them just this one last time, but she was already
wearing a glorious mass of fresh Golden Sunset roses that she had
saved at home the day before for this purpose.  Eleanor tried to make
her take them off, but Harrington interfered unexpectedly.

"What do you do that for?" he said.  "It's all right if she wants to
wear them.  People will sort of expect it.  It's a piece of her
triumph of yesterday.  It won't do her any harm."

Jean looked up surprised, caught a shifty, uneasy glance in her
brother's eye, and read his mean, cringing little soul.  He would
sacrifice her readily to his worst enemy if it suited his needs, and
she had always felt it--now she knew it.  He colored under her
glance, and tried to affect an elderly air of petting her, but Jean
was not deceived.

The train was twenty minutes late.  There was laughter and chatter
and a renewal of yesterday's merriment around the station while they
waited.  Jean was enthroned on a pile of packing cases with her
flowers about her like some queen, and her admirers at her feet.  But
though her eyes searched the landscape in every direction, from her
vantage height, she could nowhere see Holt, and when the train at
last was sighted, a mere speck down the track, she felt her heart
sinking in dismay.  He had promised and he had not come!  It seemed
as though she could not go without that last look from his eyes that
she had known would be there for her, the covenant for the lonely
future.

She tried to smile at the last and say all the bright things that
were expected of her, but she could not keep her eyes away from the
road that led to Holt's house.  When the train finally pulled out,
amid the waving multitude of friends, and the shouting of last
messages and fond good-byes, the tears sprang into her eyes unbidden
and dimmed the faces of those on the platform into a great blur.

"Well, I'm glad she's safely off," sighed Eleanor, climbing into the
car beside the children, "and I must say that man behaved pretty well
not to come down to the train.  I didn't think he had that much
sense!"

But her husband answered not a word.  He drove his car with grim
silence.  He was wishing Holt had come, and wondering if his absence
portended evil for himself.

The travellers on the Eastern Express watched with delight the
beautiful girl surrounded by her bank of flowers who had come to
brighten the monotony of their long trip.  They wondered where she
was going, and if she had left a lover behind, that she wiped the
tears away furtively and kept her head turned, looking out of the
window at the landscape, which she could not see for tears.

Captain Wetherill had assumed the care of putting Jean on the train,
and had turned over a seat, giving her plenty of room to pile the
flowers the other men brought on board, in the empty seat.  She
seemed like a young queen in her garden, with roses and lilies and
violets all about her; but at none of them did she look.  Her lips
were touching the petals of the golden rose on her breast and her
thoughts were with its giver.  His fine bearing as he skimmed the
ground on his black steed, the touch of his soft, bright hair as she
laid the wreath on his brow, the look of homage in his eyes as he
raised her hand and led her to her horse, the thrill of his voice
when he promised to see her again to say good-bye; and then the
leaden fact that he had not come!  Over and over she went the round
and always came back to that, with the choke in her throat and the
tears in her eyes.  Excuse after excuse for his not coming were
conjured in her mind and rejected; and vague fear for his safety
mingled with them too.  But the fact remained--he had not--and now
she would see him no more!

She tried again and again to gather herself together, and finally
succeeded in mastering the tears so that there was only a bright
suspicion of them in her eyes, but the sense of sadness and something
dear, unfinished and now impossible, pervaded her entire thoughts.

Fifty miles from Hawk Valley the train came to a halt at a tiny flag
station, and a young man entered, tall, handsome, eager, wearing a
dark blue suit and a soft Panama hat--a perfect gentleman in every
detail; a light in his eyes and a smile of welcome on his lips.

Jean did not look up until he was almost beside her seat, and then
her heart leaped with a light of welcome in her eyes, when she saw
that it was Holt!

With a soft little cry she hustled the overflow of flowers that lay
on the seat beside her into the opposite one and made room for him.
The car looked and was satisfied.  Her lover had not been left behind
after all, and he was good to look upon.  All was as it should be.
They settled back to watch the world-old look on the two young faces,
with a contentment and zest that never flags for the sweetest story
of all.  And there were no unkind critics here, for none of them had
ever heard of Jasper Holt.

In the still dark of the evening before, Holt had ridden forth in the
opposite direction from that he intended to take, and skirting the
town in a wide trail well known to himself, he had taken his way
across country to the little flag station, where he left his horse to
be cared for until he should return.

Very quietly they sat together, after the first wonderful greetings,
and talked.  There was over them the sadness of a coming separation
which each felt might be forever; and they spoke no word of hope that
it might be otherwise.  The day before them was a precious treasure
they meant to have and keep for life.  Many things they learned in
that brief time, of each other's hopes, longings and desires.
Quietly Holt drew from her many thoughts of her own pure heart
wherewith to build his ideal for the future.

Once he looked meaningly at the great bank of flowers before him and
then down at the golden roses on her gown.  They did not need to talk
much about such things, for their eyes could say it all, and Holt
read thoughts quickly, keenly, and spoke the language of a glance to
perfection.  The words that he felt he had not a right to speak she
might read in his face if she chose.

And she chose.

Once, as the afternoon was drawing to a close, he said suddenly:
"Harrington sent the papers back to me last evening."

Jean looked up startled, questioning, and met amusement in Holt's
eyes.

"He didn't dare to keep them.  He professes that he sent them the
minute he knew I was at home, and that he has been much disturbed by
their presence in his house lest his possession of them might be
misunderstood by me."

A little cloud of apprehension came into Jean's eyes.

"Don't be afraid to trust me," Holt said softly, with gentleness in
his eyes, "I'm not going to make any trouble for your sister.  You
know that."

Then a great light of joy came into her face, and the tears which had
caused her so much annoyance earlier in the day came rushing back for
very joy.

It was in the late afternoon that they reached the city where Jean
was to change to the sleeper.

Holt gathered up the flowers to take with her, but she put out a
protesting hand:

"Oh, please, I don't want any of them but these," and she laid her
hand tenderly over the golden roses at her waist.

A look of love and appreciation came into Holt's eyes, and he dropped
the flowers quite happily, to gather up her suit case and umbrella.

"Let the brakeman take them home to his wife, then," he said joyously.

He left her, at last, in the sleeper, and as he stood beside the
train until it moved out of the station, their eyes made promises of
trust and loyalty long after their lips were forced to remain silent.

Jean did not weep when she saw the last glimpse of his splendid
figure on the dim station platform.  She had entered upon her desert,
but she had the light of his look to shine in her heart, and her
courage rose.  Her eyes were bright and undaunted.  No tears should
break her down now.  He had kept tryst and she was content.  He would
be true and she would trust him always, even if she never saw him
again.

Just what the future would hold for her she did not care to think.
This strange vow she had made with a man she could not hope to marry
with her parents' consent, and whom she would not marry without, she
had made on trust and on trust she would keep it.

She did not mean to trouble her dear ones with the story.  They had
been far away and they could not understand.  She would not have them
looking at her pityingly, nor thinking of him unworthily.  She would
trust and live her life, and know that somewhere, somehow he was
being true also.

Most unpractical, of course, but dear and ideal.  Her sister Eleanor
would have said it was foolish, and been glad it was no worse,
hoping, of course, that now when she saw no more of him she would get
over it very soon.  But Jean was not made like that.  She knew the
heartache that was before her, and knowing, dared to rejoice in it.




CHAPTER XX

Three days later Jasper Holt rode into Hawk Valley from a Westerly
direction, serious and silent, with a light of purpose in his eyes
and a new dignity about him; and Harrington, meeting him in
trepidation, was surprised and not a little disturbed by the steady
look of understanding that accompanied the grave bow he gave him.

The tournament had accomplished one thing in Holt's favor, for many
men meeting him now acknowledged his presence by a formal greeting
who had formerly been wont to ignore him utterly or treat him with
contempt.  A few even went so far as to try to talk with him in a
friendly way when they met him in the post-office, though perhaps
there was the least bit of condescension about their manner when they
did it.  But Jasper Holt held on his reserved way, mingling little
with any save his chosen few, and presuming not at all on his
popularity on the day of the tournament.  That incident was closed
and he wished it to be as if it were not so far as they were
concerned.  The greetings of his fellow men he answered coolly,
almost curtly, always briefly, and was gone.  Would-be friends found
little encouragement in any advances they made.  A recognition won by
mere physical skill was not what he desired.  His pride lay not in
that direction.  There were things he intended to do, but they would
take time, and meantime he went on his independent way and men saw
little of him.

Time passed on and Jean's languishing lovers recovered from their
various heartbreaks.  Other maidens visited Hawk Valley and were
feasted and fêted and cherished with flowers and tournaments; but
Jasper Holt came no more to dispute their victories.  He was keeping
on his quiet, steady way, and gaining their respect every day.

Not a word passed between Holt and the girl in the East whom he
loved.  Eleanor never mentioned him in her letters, although her
conscience hurt her now and then that she did not; for she was an
honest woman and liked to give even the devil his due.  Moreover
Harrington, after a period of restlessness and unstrung nerves,
appeared to have settled down to the fact that his enemy was not
going to bring him to justice, and had developed a most extraordinary
way of saying pleasant things about him now and then.  He even
suggested once that Eleanor include him in a dinner they were giving
for business purposes; but his wife promptly vetoed the idea.  Even
for business purposes she would not lay aside her principles, she
said, and shut her lips in a firm line that reminded Harrington of
her younger sister.

Jean in her quiet, safe home had not expected letters from Holt and
so had nothing to be disappointed about; but sometimes when her
sister's letters came she listened eagerly, hoping for just some
little word that would tell her how he was faring; and after they
were read she would invariably sit looking wistfully off out of the
window.  Her father and mother noticed it and wondered if she had
left her heart behind her with any of the many lovers of whom Eleanor
had written.  They talked it over at dusk sometimes when they were
alone, and looked ahead to the years when their girl would be without
them.

"I'd like her to find a strong, noble man," said her father, "I
cannot bear to think of her treading her years alone.  And yet, there
are very few men of that kind," and he sighed.

"Perhaps we ought to send her back to Eleanor's for another visit,"
suggested her mother anxiously.  "We called her home so soon before
her visit was done you know.  It may be there was someone there.  It
may be she would like to go."

Yet when they suggested it to Jean, although her face lighted
wistfully she shook her head.

"No, Mother dear," she said firmly, "I'm going to stay with you.  I'm
not going off there again to get my head turned," and from that
purpose they could not turn her, although they tried more than once;
and so they settled back relieved and happy that she was content to
stay with them.

Nevertheless, although she would not go, she cried her heart out that
night with longing; yet knew it was better that she should stay.

A year and more had passed with Jean continuing on her quiet way in
the home and church.  It was not an unhappy place to be.  The manse
in which they lived was beautiful for situation, built of stone with
pretty rooms and many windows, the rooms all cheerful and light and
everything pleasant in a simple, unpretentious way.  The people of
the church loved Jean as they loved her father and mother, and she
was welcome everywhere in all the merrymakings.  She had a large
Sunday School class in the church and another in a mission in the
lower part of the town, and her boys were her most devoted followers.

Neither was she without older admirers, for all the young men in the
church and neighborhood were her friends, and she was as popular at
home as she had been in the west.  The little manse reception room
was never for long unadorned with flowers of some kind that had been
sent to her, and she was never without an escort to anything she
cared to attend.  Yet, though she had a pleasant circle of young
friends and seemed to enjoy their company moderately, she never was
deeply interested in any of them; and one by one those who had tried
their fortune at her hand, went sadly away and seldom came any more.

Jean seemed happy.  She spent much time with her music and her books,
when she was not actually busy about the house or in the parish
helping her father with some plan for his poor people or his sick
people.  But she was growing thin, and the wistful look was ever in
her eyes now.  Her mother watched her anxiously and petted her more
every day, and her father sighed and wished he could afford to take
her off on a foreign trip for a little while.  Jean only smiled, and
went on her way, doing every day the duty that came next.

Sometimes the longing to hear from Holt grew intolerable.  Sometimes
she almost yielded to her mother's suggestion that she make Eleanor
another visit; but something always held her back.  What was she
waiting for?  A sign from Holt?  No, that would probably never come.
He had said he was unworthy, and he would not of himself cross her
path again.  But she could not go after him.  He might have
forgotten, yet she believed in her heart he had not.  Her faith in
him glowed bright as ever.  Even when her common sense got to work
and told her he was but human and by this time the incident of their
days together was a thing of the past to him and she ought to be
satisfied if her influence had helped him even for a time to let
people know the good that was in him; still she did not believe that
he had forgotten.  She believed he was doing just what he had
promised to do, and she must stay here and trust him.  At least, if
he had forgotten, she would rather never know.

So she lived her life, and struggled with her heartache, and when the
pain was too much she knelt and prayed for him she loved.  Then at
last one day there came a great, fat letter from Eleanor, addressed
to Jean.  Most of Eleanor's letters were addressed to their mother,
so that when Jean took this one from the post-office she caught her
breath and her heart beat a trifle faster than usual.  What could
Eleanor have to say to make such a nice, thick letter, and why was it
sent to her instead of to mother?  Perhaps she was worried about
mother, or perhaps she wanted to tell some trouble to her and not
worry their parents.  But always when a letter came from her sister,
she felt there was that blessed chance that perhaps she might say
some little word about Holt, just to let her know he was alive.  It
was foolish, of course, because she never had done so, and yet hope
is a subtle thing and often abides without reason for its hiding and
springs forth at the least encouragement.  Then, there was always a
little comfort that she said nothing against him, for she knew that
Eleanor was so constituted that if Holt had done anything which the
town considered very atrocious Jean would have had to hear of it
within the next twenty-four hours; for Eleanor liked to establish her
theories by facts even if it were years after they were uttered.

Jean did not open her letter at the office.  Her hand was trembling
too much and her heart beating too wildly.  She did not wish to have
any one watch her while she read that letter, for she had a feeling
that her face might tell its secrets when she was off guard, reading.
So she held the letter with a firm little grip and walked down the
leaf-strewn street among the falling golden foliage, trying to grow
calm, and remember that this was probably just a regular commonplace
letter about everyday affairs and nothing unusual in it at all; and
she must not be disappointed nor expect anything great.

She did not open the letter until she was safe on the vine-covered
piazza at home, sitting in the hammock where she would not be
disturbed.  Some strange power held her from taking it to her mother
and sharing its first reading with her as she usually did any letters
she received, especially one of Eleanor's.  Afterward she wondered at
this; wondered too, as she remembered how cold her hand had been, and
how it had trembled when she tried to open the envelope with her hat
pin.  She was so agitated, so sure by this time that something was
the matter, that as she took the folded sheets from the envelope she
closed her eyes and breathed a quick petition:

"Oh, dear Father, make me strong for whatever it is."

Then she unfolded the thick sheets and read the letter.




CHAPTER XXI

"DEAR LITTLE SISTER:

"I have a strange task before me, to tell you of the fineness and
greatness and goodness of a man I once told you was not good enough
to save your life.  I feel as if I must ask your forgiveness and his.
You were keener sighted than we all and we are ashamed!

"Jean, what will you say when I tell you that Jasper Holt lies in our
guest chamber, your old room--dying, I am afraid?  And that we have
him to thank that our precious baby did not die a horrible death?

"Let me go back and tell you the whole story.

"After you went away James had the most extraordinary change of mind
about Jasper Holt I ever saw in him.  He just turned right around and
began to talk in his favor, even wanted me to invite him to dinner
once.  It was some business, of course, that he thought he could help
him in; but he really got to liking him a little I could see.  I
suppose it was that tournament and his riding so well; though I never
could understand why men make so much of sports.  But after it
happened you didn't hear nearly so many people talking against Jasper
Holt.  I think, too, your being so good as to ride around the track
with him had something to do with it.  People saw you were not
ashamed and they had a good look at him and saw the possibilities.
They say he was asked, yes, just actually begged, to come in the next
tournament and ride, but he wouldn't do it.  He hasn't appeared that
way since you left.  He just went about his business gravely, and
everybody began to have a lot of respect for him.  They say he has
done a lot of good to those men he has living on his place, and they
simply worship him.  Somebody told James there wasn't one of them but
would give his life for him any day.  Well, that's something, of
course.  Strange we never heard about it before.  Why, people used to
be actually afraid of him and his men.  But he has been doing some
splendid things here lately.  When Mr. Whateley died, just before the
harvest, and Mrs. Whateley was left to look after her five little
children he took his full force of men over to her place and
harvested everything, and fixed up things a great deal better than
they were ever fixed up before, for Mr. Whateley wasn't much of a
manager.  And when Lucy Whitcorn was lost for three days he organized
his men and went out and searched till he found her.  They took hold
of hands and marched across country, through the wheat fields, over
every spot so they couldn't miss her; and her grandmother just put
her arms around Jasper Holt's neck and cried and kissed him when he
brought Lucy back asleep in his arms.

"But the greatest thing was when he made the raid on the saloons.
You remember Slosson's and The Three Geese?  They used to have
terrible carouses there.  Slosson built a concert room over his
saloon, and advertised--had balls and dinners there, and The Three
Geese got a moving picture show over their place; and between them
they made a pretty fair imitation of the bottomless pit in Hawk
Valley for a while.  People got together and talked about it, and
said something ought to be done to stop it, and Sallie White even
started a petition about it and got some people to sign, but it was
near election and no one dared do much.  Then one night when things
were at their height, and there had been a shooting affair or two, we
heard the silver whistle of Jasper Holt's men, and the whole
cavalcade of them cantered by on horseback.  They went like a streak
on their dark horses, and they rode straight up to The Three Geese
and dismounted.  Before anybody knew what was happening they had
marched into the bar-room and the concert hall and taken possession.
They handcuffed everybody in the place and bound them, men and women,
and then they set to work and emptied out all the liquor and turned
the big fire hose into every room till there wasn't a smell of
whiskey left, and it was cleaner than it ever was since it was built.
They went to Slosson's and did the same thing.  Slosson, and Craven
of The Three Geese, they put into jail, and some of the others who
had been most criminal, and they cleaned the whole place out.  Jasper
Holt took some of the prisoners to his own house and kept them there
till he reformed them, and he has been keeping an eye on them right
along ever since.  Of course after that people rallied around him and
were only too glad to be counted in with him.  They all admired his
nerve, and they saw he could make things go, so they turned to work
and last month they made him mayor of the town, and he has reformed
everything in the place, till you wouldn't know it for the same town.
Now, that's the preface and I ought to have told you long ago, little
sister, but I suppose I was ashamed to, after all I had said.

"But now I'm coming to the real story, the one that brings the tears
to my eyes and makes me feel like sobbing; and I have to stop writing
and go and kiss my baby before I can go on.

"This morning (it seems a week ago) I sat at my desk writing my paper
for the next Club meeting.  Baby was out in the yard in his white
rompers and his little white hat, with his new red cart that James
brought him from Chicago on his last trip.  The window was open and I
could see him gathering leaves and carrying them in his cart to the
sidewalk, where he dumped them in a pile at the edge of the road.  I
had been having a terrible search for a word in the dictionary, and
when I looked up again I saw baby standing out in the middle of the
road working away with all his might to back up his cart, the way he
saw the big carts do, and dump his leaves on the outside of the pile.
I didn't think much about it, because there are no teams around in
the early morning usually, and the autos, the few we have in town,
don't come on this street much; but just as I was beginning to write
again I heard a horrible roaring sound, and horse's feet flying down
the street.  Something gripped my throat with fear and I could
scarcely get out of my chair.  I could see the baby standing
perfectly still, looking at something coming towards him.  His little
red wagon was standing on end, the red paint gleaming in the sun.
Then I heard that roar again and I called to Jamie to come in
quickly, but he didn't seem to know just what to do.  He took hold of
the handle of his cart and seemed to be worried for fear it would be
run over.  He tried to hurry with it on to the side walk, but being
on end it wouldn't work quickly.  On came that terrible roar!  I
don't know how I got out on the porch, but there I saw a great, angry
bull bearing down straight upon the baby.  I screamed and tried to
run down the steps, but I was so frightened my knees just sank under
me, and there I was in a heap on the steps struggling to get up, and
my baby standing still, not ten feet from that snorting, fiery
creature, with its horns lowered at him.  I shut my eyes, it was so
terrible, like a nightmare, you know, when you can't do a thing.  I
thought I was going to faint, and I tried to call James, though I
knew he wasn't at home.  Then a wonderful thing happened.  A horse
was flying down the street from the opposite direction, straight at
the bull, but baby was between.  I hadn't time to think before the
man on the horse swung over from his saddle, gathered up the baby and
dashed sideways out of the bull's way.  It was Jasper Holt, and he
picked up Jamie just as he did your handkerchief that day at the
tournament.  The poor little mite held on to his dear red cart handle
till he was up in the saddle, hindering the horse's movements, of
course, and it dangled for a minute right in front of the infuriated
bull's eyes, who charged at it viciously.  Then the weight of the
cart wrenched it from Jamie's hand, and it fell clattering under the
horse's feet, but the bull turned and made for the horse, who dashed
back and forth from side to side, dodging those awful horns as if he
were a human being and knew how to reason.  Jasper Holt tried to get
near the fence to drop the baby over, but every time he came near the
bull was in the way.  It was only a second of time that it all took,
of course, but it seemed hours; and I could only scream, but the bull
roared so loud that I couldn't be heard.  Then the dear black horse
plunged right over the bull and started down the street; but the bull
turned and caught him in the thigh with his horn and tore a great
gash--oh, Jean, I can't describe it all!  It makes me faint even to
think of it again.  The horse stumbled on bravely for a few paces,
but you could see he hadn't a chance with the bull any more for he
was crippled, and Jasper Holt saw it, too.

"By that time some men had come with guns, and that splendid fellow,
with the horse staggering under him and the bull charging straight at
him, held the baby up in the air and told the men to shoot.  It meant
a terrible risk to himself, of course, because he was in the line of
fire.  But there was nothing else to do.  They shot as carefully as
they could, and in a minute or two the bull gave one awful roar and
lurched back.  The horse sank, too, and some one took the baby.  It
is all confusion in my mind.  I don't really know what happened, only
that after I got Jamie in my arms and had hugged him and kissed him
till he cried, I looked up and saw them bringing Jasper Holt in at
the gate.  His eyes were shut and one arm hung at the side.  They
said he had been shot, but had held up the baby till the bull was out
of the fight.

"I made them take him to your room, and someone brought the doctor
almost at once, but it was a serious thing, I could see from the
first.  They wouldn't let me in the room.  I telephoned for James,
and put the baby to sleep, for he was all worn out with the
excitement, and kept starting awake and crying out, 'Naughty cow!
Naughty cow!' but just as I laid him down in his crib the doctor came
and said Jasper Holt wanted to see me.

"Jean, I didn't think a few minutes could make a difference like that
in a great, big, strong man.  He lay there so still I thought he was
dead at first; and white under all his fine tan he was white as a
ghost, with his head all done up in bandages and his beautiful hair
clotted with blood--one of the shots plowed deep into the scalp, it
seems.  He opened his eyes--what wonderful eyes he has!--and looked
at me as if he were pinning his last hope upon me, and he smiled just
faintly.  I never knew what perfect lips and teeth he had before--and
his smile just like a little child's!

"One could see it was a great effort for him to speak.

"'Will you tell your sister that I've kept my promise?' he said,
slowly and distinctly.

"When I told him I would, his eyes lighted up, as if the sun were
shining behind them, and then they fell shut and I think he must have
fainted again.  I came quite close and tried to tell him how grateful
I was to him for saving the baby's life, but his eyelids never even
quivered.  Then the doctor drew me away and said it wasn't any use to
talk, that he couldn't hear me, so I came away, but I couldn't do a
thing but just hover around the door till James came.  Then he went
in and found out how things were.  It seems the bull gored him--that
is they call it a 'scratch,' but by their faces I know its a pretty
serious scratch.

"Three shots entered his body, one a deep scalp wound, one in his
shoulder, and one in his arm.  They have been probing the wound and
having some kind of an operation.  They don't know whether he will
pull through or not.  They say the only thing that is in his favor is
his splendid health.  The men are talking now about his fine clean
life, and way he has been doing lately, especially.  It seems he
never drank nor did a lot of things that people took for granted he
did.  Oh, Jean, I can't stand it if he doesn't get well so I can
thank him for saving my baby to me.  To think that if it weren't for
him lying there dying now I should have nothing left of my beautiful
baby but a little mangled corpse!

"Jean, I know now why you looked that way when you said I did not
know Jasper Holt--the fine, true, strong, brave, tender----"

But the tears blinded Jean's eyes and she could read no more.  For a
moment she bent her head and sobbed behind the vines.  But only for a
moment.  A frenzy of fear seized her.  He was dying perhaps, and he
needed her!

She lifted her head with sudden resolve and hastily read the closing
sentences of the letter.  Then gathering up the scattered sheets she
hurried in to her father.




CHAPTER XXII

"Father!" said Jean, closing the study door and standing guard in
front of it lest her mother enter suddenly and be frightened at what
she was saying, "Father, I must go to Hawk Valley at once,--to-day!
No, it isn't Eleanor, nor any of them----" she added hastily, as she
saw the quick apprehension in her father's face.  "They are all well.
I've just had a long letter from Eleanor.  Father, it's the man who
saved my life!  He is dying and he needs me.  I know he wants me.  I
love him, father, and he loves me!  He didn't think you would like
him, and so we never said anything about it--but now he's dying and I
_must go_!"

The look in her eyes and the tilt of her chin were her father's own
when he felt he must fulfil some high calling and would not be
gainsaid.  He knew at a glance that it was useless to try to stop
her.  Besides, he had all confidence in her.

"I see, daughter," he said with instant comprehension and a swift
vision of what the wistfulness in her face had meant all these long
months.  "How soon can you be ready?  There is a train at six, I
think."

"I will be ready, father," she said, and then, turning, laid her head
for an instant on his shoulder and hid her face in his neck.  "Oh,
father _dear_!"

He folded her close and kissed her.  "Courage, daughter!  Trust in
our Father's tenderness."

"Thank you so much, father, for understanding," she said, lifting her
eyes to his face.

"You will want me to go with you, daughter?" he asked, trying to
think how it would be possible.

"No, father, you couldn't.  You have that funeral to-morrow, and they
need you," she answered, drying her tears, "and then, it wouldn't do
to leave mother.  No, I can go alone perfectly well.  Here is
Eleanor's letter.  Read it with mother.  That will explain a good
deal.  I will tell you more on the way to the station.  He is the one
who won the laurel wreath at the tournament.  I told you a little
about him----"

"Yes, I know.  I understand!  Poor little child!  Now go quickly and
I will explain to your mother about it.  You haven't much time.
Don't try to pack more than a suit case.  We can send your trunk on
after you."

There are not many fathers so wise as this one, who seemed to know
without asking just what was needed, who refrained from needless
questions, calmed the frail mother's fears, and helped his girl away
to her pain or her rejoicing as it should prove to be, with a
blessing upon her as she left.

It was in the sunset gloaming that she arrived in Hawk Valley and the
gold of the sky lay behind the hills, ruby lined, like the gold of
Jasper Holt's roses whose sweet withered leaves lay stored among her
linen in her bureau drawer at home.

They met her at the station, for a telegram had heralded her coming.
Quietly, with hushed voices, they met her; for death waited beside
the couch in the guest room of their home, and they had guessed how
it must be between these two.

"He seems to be sleeping his life away," said Eleanor, folding a
cloak about her sister, for she saw that it was going hard with her.
"They cannot rouse him.  He seems content to go.  He does not want to
live.  It is strange with one so strong and young----"

The light of battle came into the younger sister's eyes, but she
answered nothing.

"Better come and get something to eat first," said Eleanor, when they
reached the house, but Jean shook her head and fled up the stairs.

There could not have been anything quieter than the way she opened
the door and slipped into that room.  Her very garments seemed to
cling and hush about her as she walked.  But he opened his eyes at
once; a strange, wondering look came into them as she came across the
room and knelt beside him with a smile.  Then she bowed her head and
laid her lips upon his.

The doctors and the nurse who stood by were as nothing.  There were
just these two in the universe and all else was hushed.

So she moved about his room, or sat close beside his couch.  She was
there when he woke in the night, and looked at her, murmuring very
low:

"Are you real or a dream?"

"I'm real, dear.  I will not go away," she breathed, and laid her
soft lips on his again.  This time his own responded feebly.

It was in the morning that the doctors said there was hope, though
they confessed afterward that recovery began with his first sight of
Jean's face.

Jean scarcely left his side day or night, and seemed tireless.  Often
she slept on a low stool beside the bed, with her head against his
pillow.  One bright morning he awoke to find her sleeping so, and
laid his weak uncertain hand softly upon her head.  She opened her
eyes, met his smile, and knew that he was better.

"A life for a life," he said softly.  "Dear, you must go to your bed
and rest.  I will get well now.  You are killing yourself."

But her smile shone forth radiantly.

"I couldn't rest away from you," she said, giving him a dazzling
look.  "I'm not going to leave you any more, ever!"  Then she paused
and looked shyly up again.  "Unless," she added archly,
"unless--you've changed your mind and don't want me.  In that case
I'll go back home as soon as you are able to be out."

"Oh, _my dear_!" he said softly, and drew her down to his breast with
his one good arm.  "Do you mean it?  Not leave me again ever?  Are
you willing to be my wife?  Can you really trust me now?"

"I've trusted you always," she said softly, nestling her face against
his cheek.  "I trusted you the first time I saw you."

"But your people, Jean?"

"My people all love you and honor you," said Jean, with shining eyes.
"They think you are magnificent!  They cannot say enough about you.
Eleanor would bow down and kiss your feet, and my father and mother
know all about you and have sent me to you willingly.  But, Jasper,
listen, if every one in this wide world were against you, even my
dear people, I should marry you anyway and stay with you!  I couldn't
live any longer without you!"

He looked into her eyes, and he drank in her trust and loveliness,
and beautiful self-surrender as if it had been some life-giving
draught; then he laid his hand upon her hair and pressed her closer
to him.

"Oh, you wonderful woman!" he said.

It did not take Jasper Holt long to get well after that.  Hope and
joy shone in his eyes so that his face was dazzling to look upon, and
those who came into his room walked softly, filled with awe, that a
man who had come and gone among them for years and been held almost
in contempt, could have within him a soul so great and noble as to
shine like that in his face.

Jean's father and mother came west for a visit about that time, for
Jean wrote that there was no use expecting her to return now, and
when the two met, Jean's father and her lover, and stood hand in
hand, looking into one another's eyes for a full, long minute before
either spoke, each felt entirely satisfied.

Of course all this could not go on without the town knowing something
of the state of things, for everybody came to find out how the hero
was getting on; and Jasper Holt's men, as they came and went in grave
concern were beset with questions.  And when Jean arrived, then her
parents, the town opened eyes of understanding and nodded gravely,
thinking it was well.

So when it was announced most informally that a wedding would take
place no one was surprised.  Indeed, Jean's girl friends had been
embroidering and chattering away over wedding gifts for a week before
it was whispered officially that they would be needed.  Once more the
Harrington house was smothered in flowers for Jean.  Gifts came from
far and near, from all her old admirers who were now also with one
consent become Holt's admirers.  But the flowers that Jean carried in
her arms when she came down the stairs, white clad and smiling, to
meet her bridegroom, were great Golden Sunset roses, gathered by
Holt's faithful men for her; and among the guests were all those men,
fifty-four of them, standing grim and embarrassed outside the door to
watch their leader stand among the flowers and take his beautiful
girl bride by the hand.

It was sunset again, gold and ruby sunset, when they went home to his
house, after the wedding supper.

The sky was broad and clear translucent gold, with a deep heart of
pure ruby blazing out behind the rose-wreathed cottage when Jean saw
it for the first time.  The roses hung in heavy-headed wealth about
the doorway, and the men stood double ranked each side of the path.
They had decked the house for her coming, those rough men who loved
her lord, with boughs of sweet-smelling branches; heaped up blazing
logs in the big stone fireplace, and sand-strewn the floor all clean
and fresh.  There alone at last together in their own home they stood
with ruby and golden light from the sunset windows mingling with the
soft flicker of firelight, and looked into each other's eyes and knew
that their heavenly Father had been good to them.




  BOOKS BY
  GRACE LIVINGSTON HILL

  April Gold
  Happiness Hill
  The Beloved Stranger
  The Honor Girl
  Bright Arrows
  Kerry
  Christmas Bride
  Marigold
  Crimson Roses
  Miranda
  Duskin
  The Mystery of Mary
  Found Treasure
  Partners
  A Girl to Come Home To
  Rainbow Cottage
  The Red Signal
  White Orchids
  Silver Wings
  The Tryst
  The Strange Proposal
  Through These Fires
  The Street of the City
  All Through the Night
  The Gold Shoe

  Astra
  Homing
  Blue Ruin
  Job's Niece
  Challengers
  The Man of the Desert
  Coming Through the Rye
  More Than Conqueror
  Daphne Deane
  A New Name
  The Enchanted Barn
  The Patch of Blue
  Girl from Montana
  The Ransom
  Rose Galbraith
  The Witness
  Sound of the Trumpet
  Sunrise
  Tomorrow About This Time
  Amorelle
  Head of the House
  Ariel Custer
  In Tune with Wedding Bells
  Chance of a Lifetime

  Maris
  Crimson Mountain
  Out of the Storm
  Exit Betty
  Mystery Flowers
  The Prodigal Girl
  Girl of the Woods
  Re-Creations
  The White Flower
  Matched Pearls
  Time of the Singing of Birds
  Ladybird
  The Substitute Guest
  Beauty for Ashes
  Stranger Within the Gates
  The Best Man
  Spice Box
  The Seventh Hour
  Dawn of the Morning
  The Search
  Brentwood
  Cloudy Jewel
  The Voice in the Wilderness


  BOOKS BY
  RUTH LIVINGSTON HILL

  Mary Arden (_with Grace Livingston Hill_)
  Morning Is for Joy
  John Nielson Had a Daughter
  Bright Conquest









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FINDING OF JASPER HOLT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


